---
title: Very High-Energy Collisions of Hadrons
author: Richard P. Feynman
year: 1969
source_type: paper
topic: parton model
source_url: https://scispace.com/pdf/very-high-energy-collisions-of-hadrons-4xzhu0bf0a.pdf
---

VERY HIGH-ENERGY COLLISIONS OF HADRONS
Richard P. Feynman
California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, California
(Received 20 October 1969)
Proposals are made predicting the character of longitudinal-momentum distributions
in hadron collisions of extreme energies.
Of the total cross section for very high-energy
hadron collisions, perhaps is elastic and 10%
of this is easily interpreted as diffraction dissociation. The rest is inelastic. Collisions involving only a few outgoing particles have been carefully studied, but except for the aforementioned
elastic and diffractive phenomena they all fall off
(probably as a power of the energy at high energy). The constant part of the total inelastic cross
section cannot come from them. And we know
that at such energies, the majority of collisions
lead to a relatively large number of secondaries
(perhaps the multiplicity increases logarithmically with energy). These collisions have not
been studied extensively because, with the large
number of particles, so many quantities or combinations of quantities can be evaluated that one
does not know how to organize the material for
analysis and presentation.
It is the purpose of this paper to make suggestions as to how these cross sections might behave so that significant quantities can be extracted from data taken at different energies. These
suggestions arose in theoretical studies from
several directions and do not represent the result of consideration of any one model. They are
an extraction of those features which relativity
and quantum mechanics and some empirical facts¹
imply almost independently of a model. I have
difficulty in writing this note because it is not in
the nature of a deductive paper, but is the result
of an induction. I am more sure of the conclusions than of any single argument which suggested them to me for they have an internal consistency which surprises me and exceeds the consistency of my deductive arguments which hinted
at their existence.
Only the barest indications of the logical bases
of these suggestions will be indicated here. Perhaps in a future publication I can be more detailed.2
Supposing that transverse momenta are limited
in a way independent of the large z-component
momentum of each of the two oncoming particles
in the center-of-mass system (so s = 2W), an
analysis of field theory in the limit of very large
W suggests the appropriate variables to use for
the various outgoing particles in comparing experiments at various values of W in the c.m. system. They are the longitudinal momentum Pz in
ratio to the total available W, i.e., x = Pz/W, and
the transverse momenta Q in absolute units.
1415
VOLUME 23, NUMBER 24 PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS
Differential cross sections for dx d² of the various outgoing particles will then have simple
properties as a function of W. Negative x means
particles with P₂ negative.
First we must distinguish exclusive and inclusive experiments. In exclusive experiments, we
ask that certain particles, with given x and &, be
formed, and no others. An example is a two-body charge-exchange reaction. A typical exclusive reaction is
A+B-C+D,
where A is to the right, B to the left, and C1, C2,
..., C, are definite particles with definite Q's
and x's all moving to the right (x >0), whereas
the D, D2,., D are moving to the left (x <0).
The cross section should then vary, for sufficiently high W, as s2α(t) -2 or (W2)20(t)-2, where
a(t) is the a of the highest Regge trajectory capable of converting the quantum numbers of A into those of the sum of the C's, and t is the transverse momentum difference of A and the sum of
the C's.
This is an evident expectation from Regge theory and should be as approximately valid as that
theory is for two-body reactions. The additional
point here is the clarification of using the variable x to compare experiments at various energies. If no unitary quantum number is required
to be exchanged, so the C group has the same
quantum numbers as A, this C group can rise
from A via diffraction dissociation and the cross
section should approach a constant ratio to the
elastic cross section at this value of t (i.e., it
should be constant if the elastic cross section
is).
Next, an inclusive experiment is one in which
we look for special particles with x, in the final state but we allow anything else to be produced also. An example is a measurement of the
mean number of K *'s produced with given Q,x in
a pp reaction. Such cross sections should approach a constantas W-∞.
How can these be reconciled? Why does the
cross section fall if, for example, in a two-body
reaction we must exchange 3-component of isotopic spin? Because under such circumstances,
the current of 3-component isospin must suddenly
reverse from right moving to left moving. Thus
if any fields are connected to such currents as
sources, they would be expected to radiate (in a
manner analogous to bremsstrahlung). To be an
exclusive experiment (say, pure two-body), we
require that no such radiation occur, a condition
1416
15 DECEMBER 1969
becoming more and more difficult to satisfy as
the energy rises and the current reversal is
sharper.
This leads us to expect, in the majority of collisions, many particles over a wide range of x,
but their characteristics for the smaller values
of x are easy to envision. By Lorentz transformation, the fields to be radiated are becoming
narrower and narrower in the z direction as W
rises. The energy in this field is therefore distributed in a 5 function in z. Fourier analyzed,
this means that the field energy is uniform in
momentum, dPz. Since each particle of mass
carries energy E = (μ² + P₂²+ Q2)1/2, if we suppose
that the field energy is distributed among the
various kinds of particles in fixed ratios (independent of energy W), we conclude that the mean
number of particles of any kind and of fixedQ
is distributed as dP2/E for not too large x. That
is, the probability of finding, among all the emitted particles, a particle of kind i, transverse
momentum Q, and mass is of the form f(Q,
Pz/W)dP2d²Q/(μ;² +Q² +P₂2)1/2, where fi(Q, x) is
ultimately independent of W and has a limit F(Q)
for smallx. As W-, for any finite x, dP2/E
becomes dx/x, of course.
Because of this dx/x behavior, the mean total
number (or "multiplicity") of any kind of particle
rises logarithmically with W. We need not decide what are "primarily emitted units" and what
are secondaries arising from their decay, for
the results so far stated are in a form that does
not depend on that. If we imagine some primary
independently emitted units, however, their number n would also rise logarithmically with energy, and the probability that none of them would
be emitted might be e-7 (as suggested by a Poisson distribution) which would then fall as a power
of the energy, accounting for the Regge expressions which we are supposing are valid for such
exclusive collisions.
We can extend this idea to other amplitudes
which involve a similar . In particular, we find
that the probability that A +B-C + anything
should vary as (1-x)1-2α(t) dxc, where C is moving to the right with almost all the momentum of
A (that is, for 1-xc small). Here a(t) is the highest trajectory (excluding the Pomeranchukon)
which could carry off the quantum numbers (and
squared momentum transfer t) needed to change
A to C.
Thus the Regge trajectory function a(1) appears
not only in an interaction (as s2 -2) but also in an
emission process, reminiscent of the close re-
VOLUME 23, NUMBER 24 PHYSICAL REVIEW LETTERS 15 DECEMBER 1969
lationship of virtual interaction and real emis- the others.
sion that Yukawa emphasized.
Finally, for those special reactions which are
partially exclusive, in which anything can be
emitted except that a hadron must be transferred
from the right-moving to the left-moving system
(carrying its fermionic and half-integral spin
character) the cross section should vary as 1/s.
Of this last conclusion, I am less sure than of
¹I have taken the approximate existence of Regge poles,
the constant total cross sections, and the constant
transverse-momentum distributions as empirical facts.
2For a somewhat more detailed description, see
R. P. Feynman, in Proceedings of the Third Topical
Conference on High Energy Collisions of Hadrons, Stony Brook, N. Y., 1969 (to be published).