---
title: There's Plenty of Room at the Bottom
author: Richard P. Feynman
year: 1960
source_type: speech
topic: Nanotechnology
source_url: https://calteches.library.caltech.edu/47/2/1960Bottom.pdf
---

on December 29 at the annua meeting of the American Physicar society
22
Calteсп.
Engineering and Science
"There's Plenty of Room at the Bottom" is a transcript of a talk given by Dr. Feynman
of the nail on your small finger. And there is a device
on the market, they tell me, by which you can write
the Lord's Praver on the head of a pin But that's
imagine that it is written in raised letters of metal;
that is, where the black is in the Encyclopedia, we
have raised letters of metal that are actually 1/25 000
As soon as I mention this, people tell me about
miniaturization, and how far it has progressed today.
They tell me ahout electric motors that are the size
is enough room on the head of a pin to put all of the
Encyclopaedia Brittanica.
Furthermore it can be read if it is so written Let's
technical applications.
What I want to talk about is the problem of manipulatino and controlling things on зmall seale
still would contain in its area 1,000 atoms. So, each
dot can easily be adjusted in size as required by the
photoengraving and there is no auestion that there
an
about the strange phenomena that occur in complex
situations. Furthermore, a point that is most imporThis, when you demagnify it by 25,000 times, is still
80 angstroms in diameter - 32 atoms across, in an
tant is that it would have an enormous numher of ordinary metal In other words one of thore dots
as te m nat in WI mot ten us muС or
mental physics (in the sense of, "What are the strange
particles?") but it is more like solid-state physics in
tho conco that it might tell u muoh of groat interoct
solving power of the eye is about 1/120 of an inch -
that is roughly the diameter of one of the little dots on
tho fine half-tone reproduotions in the E'nowelopaedia
neu, I Wien
been done, but in which an enormous amount can
be done in principle. This field is not quite the same
ac tho othorg in thot it uill not toll uo muoh of fundo
me area he pages of e -
cyclopaedia Brittanica. Therefore, all it is necessary
to do is to reduce in size all the writing in the Enолорорoodin b 25000 timoc Ic thot pogciblo? Tho ro
u to ead us ain arong. e ueverq
ment of ever higher vacuum was a continuing development of the same kind.
Глоuld liko to docoribon fiold in uuhioh littlo ho
ets seel onin De IЛОIved. ne nead
pin is a sixteenth of an inch across. If you magnify it
by 25,000 diameters, the area of the head of the pin
in thonl to tho oron of oll tho роо of tho Fn
tempo poiy n a serentine adventure. rerey
Bridgman, in designing a way to obtain higher pressures, opened up another new field and was able to
into it ond to lood u oll along Tho douolon
is uectuoП.
Why cannot we write the entire 24 volumes of the
Encyclopaedia Brittanica on the head of a pin?
I ot'a uoo ubot оud ba inuоuоd Tho bood of
covere u пkе low tennperature, wnien seenns
be bottomless and in which one can go down and
down. Such a man is then a leader and has some
onelu in coiontifio оdontiro Ron
Del in the year 2000, Wnen uley 1o0k
back at this age, they will wonder why it was not
until the year 1960 that anybody began seriously to
thia dincat
I imagine experimental physicists must often look
with envy at men like Kamerlingh Onnes, who disod f:old l:l6 lo bic
nothing; that's the most primitive, halting step in the
direction I intend to discuss. It is a staggeringly small
holo I h0000 hon hou lool
by Richard P. Feynman
An invitatiom to entor a nen freld of phusicS
at the Bottom
There's Plenty of Room
There is no intensity problem in these devices -
February 1960
communications equipment, and nuclear controls.
23
to find some surface with which to coat the original
pin so that, where the electrons bombard, a change
is made which we could recognize later.
Going down - General Electric's minute new tunnel
diode, capable of operating at frequencies above 4
billion cycles, and intended for use in computers,
face of the metal. Will such a beam etch away the
metal if it is run long enough? I don't know. If it
doesn't work for a metal surface, it must be possible
very snan pnotoerectrie screen. Ihen electrons come
away from the screen where the light is shining. These
electrons are focused down in size by the electron
microscope lenses to impinge directly upon the sur
A simpler way might be this (though I am not sure
it would work): We take light and, through an optical
microscope running backwards, we focus it onto a
could again use our system of lenses and make
small image in the form of ions, which would deposit
the metal on the pin.
a
some pnoto procesS
a screen which has holes in it in the form of the letters. Then we would strike an arc behind the holes
and draw metallic ions through the holes; then we
we scan in lines.
This method might be very slow because of space
charge limitations. There will be more rapid methods.
We could first make perhans by somo photo n
What would our librarian at Caltech say, as she
runs all over from one building to another, if I tell
cathode ray oscilloscope, by going across in lines,
and having an adjustment which determines the
amount of material which is going to be deposited as
hand - and not written in code, but as a simple reproduction of the original pictures, engravings, and
everything else on a small scale without loss of resolution
source of ions, sent through the microscope lenses
in reverse, could be focused to a very small spot. We
could write with that spot like we write in a TV
pages as there are in this magazine. All of the information which all of mankind has ever recorded in
books can be carried around in a pamphlet in your
on anats anhcet o on
now. But
me argue that it is not as difficult as it first appears
to be. We can reverse the lenses of the electron microscope in order to demagnify as well as maonify A
tis let
which we have made the copies, with all this information, is on an area of approximately the size of 35
pages of the Encyclopaedia. That is about half as many
How do we write small?
The next question is: How do we write it? We
o stendond tooh
pneaus caп
put in a square of a thousand pins on a side, or an
area of about 3 square yards. That is to say, the silica
replica with the paper-thin backing of plastic, with
press tie same metal plate again into plastic and
would have another copy.
we would it take? It would take, of course, the area of
about a million pinheads because, instead of there
being just the 24 volumes of the Encyclopaedia, there
aro 24 million volumos Tho million ninhoodo oon ha
pin, it would be easy for us to read it today. Furthermore, there is no question that we would find it easy
to make copies of the master; we would just need to
million volumes of interest in the world.
What would happen if I print all this down at the
scale we have been discussing? How much space
electron microscope!
There is no question that if the thing were reduced
by 25,000 times in the form of raised letters on the
volumes; there are also 5 million volumes in the
National Library in France. Undoubtedly there are
duplications, so let us say that there are some 24
by evaporang go
an angle against the silica so that all the little letters
will appear clearly, dissolve the plastic away from
the silica film, and then look through it with an
Inats tie rnсусторaeula Brittanica on the head of
a pin, but let's consider all the books in the world.
The Library of Congress has approximately 9 million
volumes: the British Museum Library has 5 million
day..) We would press the metal into a plastic material
and make a mold of it, then peel the plastic off very
carefully, evaporate silica into the plastic to get
very thin film then shadouu it bu orotinr wold ot
a
are demagnified down to a very tiny area so that,
again, they are very intense. I don't know why this
hasn't been done yet!
T'o Tl di D:146
(They will undoubtedly find a better way when we
do actually have it written, but to make my point conservatively I shall just take techniques we know tolight which we get from a page is concentrated onto
a very small area so it is very intense. The few
electrons which come from the photoelectric screen
of their ordinary size. How would we read it?
If we had something written in such a way, we
could read it using techniques in common use today.
not what you are used to in magnification, where you
have to take a few electrons and spread them over a
bigger and bigger screen; it is just the opposite. The