---
title: Quantum Mechanical Computers
author: Richard P. Feynman
year: 1986
source_type: journal article
topic: quantum computing, reversible computation, Hamiltonian
source_url: http://www.quantum-dynamic.eu/doc/feynman85_qmc_optics_letters.pdf

Quantum Mechanical Computers
By Richard P. Feynman
Introduction
His work is a part of an effort to T
analyze the physical limitations
of computers due to the laws of
physics. For example, Bennett! has
made a careful study of the free energy
dissipation that must accompany computation. He found it to be virtually
zero. He suggested to me the question
of the limitations due to quantum mechanics and the uncertainty principle. I
have found that, aside from the obvious
limitation to size if the working parts
are to be made of atoms, there is no
fundamental limit from these sources
either.
We are here considering ideal machines; the effects of small imperfections will be considered later. This study
is one of principle; our aim is to exhibit
some Hamiltonian for a system which
could serve as a computer. We are not
concerned with whether we have the
most efficient system, nor how we
could best implement it.
Since the laws of quantum physics
are reversible in time, we shall have to
consider computing engines which
obey such reversible laws. This problem already occurred to Bennett¹, and
to Fredkin and Toffoli², and a great deal
of thought has been given to it. Since it
may not be familiar to you here, I shall
review this, and in doing so, take the
opportunity to review, very briefly, the
conclusions of Bennett2, for we shall
confirm them all when we analyze our
quantum system.
It is a result of computer science that
a universal computer can be made by a
suitably complex network of interconnected primitive elements. Following
the usual classical analysis we can imagine the interconnections to be ideal
wires carrying one of two standard voltages representing the local 1 and 0. We
can take the primitive elements to be
just two, NOT and AND (actually just
the one element NAND = NOT AND
suffices, for if one input is set at 1 the
output is the NOT of the other input).
They are symbolized in Fig. 1, with the
logical values resulting on the outgoing
wires, resulting from different combinations of input wires.
From a logical point of view, we must
consider the wires in detail, for in other
systems, and our quantum system in
particular, we may not have wires as
OPTICS NEWS
such. We see we really have two more
logical primitives, FAN OUT when two
wires are connected to one, and EXCHANGE, when wires are crossed. In
the usual computer the NOT and NAND
primitives are implemented by transistors, possibly as in Fig. 2.
What is the minimum free energy that
must be expended to operate an ideal
computer made of such primitives?
Since, for example, when the AND operates the output line, c'is being determined to be one of two values no matter
what it was before the entropy change is
In(2) units. This represents a heat generation of kT In(2) at temperature T. For
many years it was thought that this represented an absolute minimum to the
quantity of heat per primitive step that
had to be dissipated in making a calculation.
The question is academic at this time.
In actual machines we are quite concerned with the heat dissipation question, but the transistor system used actually dissipates about 1010kT! As
Bennett3 has pointed out, this arises
because to change a wire's voltage we
dump it to ground through a resistance;
and to build it up again we feed charge,
again through a resistance, to the wire.
It could be greatly reduced if energy
Richard P. Feynman is a professor of theoretical physics àt California Institute of Technology.
This article is based on his plenary talk presented at the CLEO/
IQEC Meeting in 1984.
February
could be stored in an inductance, or
other reactive element.
However, it is apparently very difficult to make inductive elements on silicon wafers with present techniques.
Even Nature, in her DNA copying machine, dissipates about 100 kT per bit
copied. Being, at present, so very far
from this kT In(2) figure, it seems ridiculous to argue that even this is too high
and the minimum is really essentially
zero. But, we are going to be even more
ridiculous later and consider bits written on one atom instead of the present
1011 atoms. Such nonsense is very entertaining to professors like me. I hope
you will find it interesting and entertaining also.
What Bennett pointed out was that
this former limit was wrong because it
is not necessary to use irreversible
primitives. Calculations can be done
with reversible machines containing
only reversible primitives. If this is done
the minimum free energy required is
independent of the complexity or number of logical steps in the calculation. If
anything, it is kT per bit of the output
answer.
But even this, which might be considered the free energy needed to clear the
computer for further use, might also be
considered as part of what you are going to do with the answer-the information in the result if you transmit it to
another point. This is a limit only
achieved ideally if you compute with a
reversible computer at infinitesimal
speed.
Computation with a
reversible machine
We will now describe three reversible
primitives that could be used to make a
universal machine (Toffoli4). The first is
the NOT which evidently loses no information, and is reversible, being reversed by acting again with NOT. Because the conventional symbol is not
symmetrical we shall use an X on the
wire instead (see Fig. 3a).
Next is what we shall call the CONTROLLED NOT (see Fig. 3b). There are
two entering lines, a and b and two
exiting lines, a'and b. The a is always
the same as a, which is the control line.
If the control is activated a = 1 then the
out bis the NOT of b. Otherwise b is
unchanged, b'= b. The table of values
11
NOT
ala
이
α
b
0-
AND FAN OUT
α
-0
abic
00
ΟΙ100
Fig. 1. Primitive elements.
for input and output is given in Fig. 3.
The action is reversed by simply repeating it.
The quantity b'is really a symmetric
function of a and b called XOR, the
exclusive or; a or b but not both. It is
likewise the sum modulo two of a and Ь.
and can be used to compare a and b,
giving a 1 as a signal that they are different. Please notice that this function
XOR is itself not reversible. For example, if the value is zero we cannot tell
whether it came from (a,b) = (0,0) or
from (1,1) but we keep the other line
a'=a to resolve the ambiguity.
We will represent the CONTROLLED
NOT by putting a 0 on the control wire,
connected with a vertical line to an X on
the wire which is controlled.
This element can also supply us with
FAN OUT, for if b = 0 we see that a is
copied onto line b. This COPY function
will be important later on. It also supplies us with EXCHANGE, for three of
them used successively on a pair of
lines, but with alternate choice for control line, accomplishes an exchange of
the information on the lines (Fig. 3b).
It turns out that combinations of just
these two elements alone are insufficient to accomplish arbitrary logical
functions. Some element involving
three lines is necessary. We have chosen
what we can call the CONTROLLED
CONTROLLED NOT. Here (see Fig. 3c)
we have two control lines ab. which
appear unchanged in the output and
which change the third line e to NOT c
only if both lines are activated (a = 1
and b= 1). Otherwise c' c. If the third
line input c is set to 0, then evidently it
becomes 1 (c'= 1) only if both a and b
are 1 and therefore supplies us with the
AND function (see Table 1).
Three combinations for (a,b), namely
(0,0), 0,1), and (1,0) all give the same
value, 0, to the AND (a,h) function so
the ambiguity requires two bits to resolve it. These are kept in the lines a,b in
the output so the function can be reversed (by itself, in fact). The AND function is the carry bit for the sum of a and
b.
12
EXCHANGE
b
ab
00 00
ΟΙ 10
0
From these elements it is known that
any logical circuit can be put together
by using them in combination, and in
fact, computer science shows that a universal computer can be made. We will
illustrate this by a little example. First,
of course, as you see in Fig. 4, we can
make an adder, by first using the CONTROLLED CONTROLLED NOT and
a
Fig.
NOT
+V
NAND
+V
2. Transistor circuits
NOT and NAND.
c
for
then the CONTROLLED NOT in succession, to produce from a and b and 0, as
input lines, the original a on one line,
the sum on the second line and the
carry on the third.
A more elaborate circuit is a full
adder, (see Fig. 5), which takes a carry,
c, (from some previous addition), and
adds it to the two lines a and b and has
an additional line, d, with a 0 input. It
requires four primitive elements to be
put together. Besides this total sum, the
total of the three, a,b, and c and the
carry, we obtain on the other two lines,
two pieces of information. One is the a
that we started with, and the other is.
some intermediary quantity that we calculated on route.
This is typical of these reversible systems, they produce not only what you
want in output, but also a certain
amount of garbage. In this particular
case, and as it turns out in all cases, the
garbage can be arranged to be, in fact,
just the input, if we would just add the
extra CONTROLLED NOT on the first
two lines, as indicated by the dotted
lines in Fig. 5, we see that the garbage
would become a and b, which were the
inputs of at least two of the lines. (We
know this circuit can be simplified but
we do it this way for illustrative purposes.)
In this way, we can by various combinations produce a general logic unit
that transforms n bits to n bits in a
reversible manner. If the problem you
are trying to do is itself reversible, then
there might be no extra garbage, but in
general, there are some extra lines
needed to store up the information
which you would need to be able to
reverse the operation. In other words,
we can make any function that the conventional system can, plus garbage. The
garbage contains the information you
need to reverse the process.
And how much garbage? It turns out
in general, that if the output data that
you're looking for has k bits, then starting with an input and k bits containing
0, we can produce, as a result, just the
input and the output and no further
garbage. This is reversible because
knowing the output and the input, permits you of course, to undo everything.
(a) NOT (b) CONTROLLED NOT
의
0
b
αα
Ο
ablab
FAN OUT
a
00 00 EXCHANGE
(c) CONTROLLED CONTROLLED NOT
February
b
c00
*
See Table
-c'
Fig. 3. Reversible primitives.
OPTICS NEWS
a α
o
α
a .a---O---a = 0'
s' os--x--b = b
SUM
C SUM = c'
CARRY c' d=o * CARRY = d'
Fig. 4. Adder. Fig. 5. Full adder.
This proposition is always reversible.
The argument for this is illustrated in
Fig. 6.
Suppose we began with a machine M,
which, starting with an input, and some
large number of 0's, produces the desired output plus a certain amount of
extra data which we call garbage. Now
we've seen that the copy operation
which can be done by a sequence of
CONTROLLED NOT's is possible, so if
we have originally an empty register,
with the k bits ready for the output, we
can, after the processor M has operated,
copy the output from the M onto this
new register.
After that, we can build the opposite
machine, the M in reverse, the reverse
machine, which would take this output
of M and garbage and turn it into the
input and 0's. Thus, seen as an overall
machine, we would have started with
the k O's of the register for the output,
and the input, and ended up with those
k O's occupied by the output data, and
repeat the input data as a final product.
The number of 0's that was originally
needed in the M machine in order to
hold the garbage, is restored again to 0,
and can be considered as internal wires
inside the new complete machine (M, M
and copy).
Overall, then, we have accomplished
what we set out to do, and therefore
garbage need never be any greater than
a repetition of the input data.
A quantum mechanical
computer
We now go on to consider how such a
computer can also be built using the
laws of quantum mechanics. We are
going to write a Hamiltonian, for a system of interacting parts, which will behave in the same way as a large system
in serving as a universal computer. Of
course the large system also obeys
quantum mechanics, but it is in interaction with the heat baths and other things
that could make it effectively irreversible.
What we would like to do is make the
OPTICS NEWS
computer as small and as simple as
possible. Our Hamiltonian will describe
in detail all the internal computing actions, but not of course, those interactions with the exterior involved in entering the input (preparing the initial
state) and reading the output.
How small can such a computer be?
How small, for instance, can a number
be? Of course a number can be represented by bits of 1's and O's. What we're
going to do is imagine that we have twostate systems, which we will call "atoms." An n bit number is then represented by a state of a "register;" a set of
n two-state systems.
Depending upon whether or not each
atom is in one or another of its two
states, which we call |1> and 10>, we
can of course, represent any number.
And the number can be read out of such
a register by determining, or measuring, in which state each of the atoms are
at a given moment. Therefore one bit
will be represented by a single atom
being in one of two states, the states we
will call 11> and 10>.
What we will have to do then can be
understood by considering an example;
the example of a CONTROLLED CONTROLLED NOT. Let G be some sort of
an operation on three atoms a, b and c,
which converts the original state of a,b,
and c into a new appropriate state,
a'b'c', so that the connection between
a'b'and c'and a,b,c, are just what we
would have expected if a,b, and c represented wires, and the a',b' and c'were
the output wires of a CONTROLLED
CONTROLLED NOT.
It must be appreciated here, that at
the moment we are not trying to move
the data from one position to another,
we are just going to change it. Unlike
the situation in the actual wired computer in which the voltages on one wire
then go over to voltages on another,
what we're specifically making is something simpler, that the three atoms are
in some particular state, and that an
operation is performed, which changes
the state to new values, a',b',c.
What we would have then is that the
February
state, in the mathematical form
la,b',c'> is simply some operation G
operating on la,b,c>. In quantum mechanics, state changing operators are
linear operators, and so we'll suppose
that G is linear. Therefore, G is a matrix,
and the matrix elements of G, Gabeabe
are all 0 except those in the following
table, which are of course 1.
a b c a' b c'
0 0 0 0 0 0
이 이 1 0 이 1
0 1 0 0 0
0 1 0 1 1
1 이 이 1 0 이
0 1 1 0 1
1 1 0 1 1
1 1 1 1 0
TABLE 1
This table is the same table that represents the truth value table for the CONTROLLED CONTROLLED NOT. It is apparent that the operation is reversible,
and that can be represented by saying
that G*G = 1, where the * means Hermitian adjoint. That is to say G is a unitary
matrix. (In fact G is also a real matrix G*
G, but that's only a special case.) To
be more specific, we're going to write
Anh.e for this special G. We shall use the
same matrix A with different numbers
of subscripts to represent the other
primitive elements.
To take a simple example, the NOT,
which would be represented by A is the
simple matrix
This is a 2 x 2 matrix and can be represented in many ways, in different notations, but the particular one we will use
to define these is by the method of creation and annihilation operators. Consider operating in this case, on a single
line a. In order to save alphabets, let us
13
call a the matrix 1 for the down-state. We'll use I to
represent the diagonal matrix,
which annihilates the 1 on atom a and
converts it to 0; a is an operator which
converts the state ll> to|0>. But, if the
state of the atom were originally 10>,
the operator a produces the number 0.
That is, it doesn't change the state, it
simply produces the numerical value
zero when operating on that state. The
conjugate of this thing, of course, is:
10
which creates, in the sense that operating on the 0 state, it turns it to the 1
state. In other words, it moves from10>
toll>. When operating on the1> state,
there is no further state above that that
you can create, and therefore it gives it
the number zero. Every other operator
2 × 2 matrix can be represented in
terms of these a and a*. For example,
the product a*a is equal to the matrix
a*a =
이
which you might call N. It is 1 when the
state is 1> and 0 when the state is 10>.
It gives the number that the state of the
atom represents. Likewise the product
au
To 이
01
is 1- N, and gives 0 for the up-state and
M
TIME
Γ
A
COPY
OUT PUT
이
OUTPUT+GARB OUTPUT+GARB -NPUT0000
Ο
0 1
As a consequence of all this, aa* +
a*u = 1.
It is evident then that our matrix for
NOT, the operator that produces NOT,
is A a + a* and further of course,
that's reversible, A*A = 1, A is unitary.
In the same way the matrix Ab for the
CONTROLLED NOT can be worked
out. If you look at the table of values for
CONTROLLED NOT you see that it can
be written this wav:
a*a (b + b*) + aa*
In the first term, the a*a selects the
condition that the line a = 1 in which
case we want b +b* the NOT to apply to
b. The second term selects the condition that the line a is 0,in which case we
want nothing to happen to b and the
unit matrix on the operators of b is
implied. This can also be written as 1+
a*a (b + b* - 1), the 1 representing all
the lines coming through directly, but
in the case that a is 1, we would like to
correct that by putting in a NOT instead
of leaving the line b unchanged.
INPU1000000
MACHINE COPY REVERSE
MACHINE
The matrix for the CONTROLLED
CONTROLLED NOT is:
Aah.e= 1+ a* ab*b (c + c* - 1)
as perhaps, you may be able to see.
The next question is what the matrix
is for a general logic unit which consists
of a sequence of these. As an example,
we'll study the case of the full adder
which we described before (see Fig. 5).
Now we'll have, in the general case,
four wires represented by a,b,c and d;
コト
00 OUTPUTINPUT
NEW OVERALL
MACHINE
(ZEROS NEEDED FOR M
CAN BE CONSIDERED
INTERNAL TO NEW MACH)
we don't necessarily have to have d as 0
in all cases, and we would like to describe how the object operates in general (if d is changed to 1 d' is changed to
its NOT). It produces new numbers a',
b, c'and d', and we could imagine with
our system that there are four atoms
labeled a,b,c,d in a state labeled
la,b,c,d> and that a matrix M operates
which changes these same four atoms
so that they appear to be in the state
la', b', c', d'> which is appropriate for
this logic unit. That is, ifIYIN represents the incoming state of the four bits
M is a matrix which generates an outgoing state lYoUT> = MIIN for the four
bits.
For example, if the input state were
the state 1,0,1,0> then, as we know, the
output state should be [1,0,0,1>; the
first two a',b'should be 1,0 for those two
first lines come straight through, and
the last two c',d' should be 0,1 because
that represents the sum and carry of the
first three, a, b, c, bits in the first input,
as d = 0. Now the matrix M for the adder
can easily be seen as the result of five
successive primitive operations, and
therefore becomes the matrix product
of the five successive matrices representing these primitive objects.
M= Ab Abc Abcd Aa.b Aab.d
The first, which is the one written
farthest to the right, is Aab.d for that
represents the CONTROLLED CONTROLLED NOT in which a and b are the
CONTROL lines, and the NOT appears
on line d. By looking at the diagram in
Fig. 5 we can immediately see what the
remaining factors in the sequence represent. The last factor, for example, Aa.b
means that there's a CONTROLLED
NOT with a CONTROL on line a and
NOT on line b. This matrix will have the
unitary property M*M = 1 since all of
the A's out of which it is a product are
unitary. That is to say M is a reversal
operation, and M* is its inverse.
Our general problem, then, is this.
Let A1, A2, A3,A be the succession of
operations wanted, in some logical
unit, to operate on n lines. The 2"X2"
matrix M needed to accomplish the
same goal is a product Ak A3A2A1, where
each A is a simple matrix. How can we
generate this M in a physical way if we
know how to make the simpler elements?
In general, in quantum mechanics,
the outgoing state at time t, is eitVIN.
where IN is the input state, for a system
with Hamiltonian H. To try to find, for a
given special time t, the Hamiltonian
which will produce M = eitlt when M is
such a product of non-commuting ma14
Fig. 6. Clearing garbage.
February OPTICS NEWS
trices, from some simple property of
the matrices themselves, appears to be
very difficult.
We realize however, that at any particular time, if we expand the etl out (as
1 + iHt - H212/2-..) we'll find the operator H operating an innumerable arbitrary number of times, once, twice,
three times and so forth, and the total
state is generated by a superposition of
these possibilities. This suggests that we
can solve this problem of the composition of these A's in the following way.
We add to the n atoms, which are in
our register, an entirely new set of k +1
atoms, which we'll call "program
counter sites." Let us call q; and qi the
annihilation and creation operators for
the program site i for i = 0 to k. A good
thing to think of, as an example, is an
electron moving from one empty site to
another. If the site i is occupied by the
electron, its state is Il>, while if the site
is empty, its state is 10>.
We write, as our Hamiltonian:
k-1
H= qi+1* qiAi+1
i=0
+ complex conjugate
= 91 * q A1 + 92 * qi A2
+ 43* q2A3 +.
+ 90* 91A* +q1* q92A2
+ 92 * 933 +
The first thing to notice is that if all
the program sites are unoccupied, that
is all the program atoms are initially in
the state 0, nothing happens because
every term in the Hamiltonian starts
with an annihilation operator and it
gives 0 therefore.
The second thing we notice is that if
only one or another ofthe program sites
is occupied (in state 1>), and the rest
are not (state 10>), then this is always
true. In fact the number of program
sites that are in state |l > is a conserved
quantity. We will suppose that in the
operation of this computer, either no
sites are occupied (in which case nothing happens) or just one site is осcиpied. Two or more program sites are
never both occupied during normal operation.
Let us start with an initial state where
site 0 is occupied, is in the|1> state, and
all the others are empty, 10> state. If
later, at some time, the final site k is
found to be in the II> state, (and therefore all the others in 10>) then, we
claim, the n register has been multiplied by the matrix M, which is Aк..
A2A1 as desired.
Let me explain how this works. Suppose that the register starts in any initial
state, Vin, and that the site, 0, of the
OPTICS NEWS
program counter is occupied. Then the
only term in the entire Hamiltonian
that can first operate, as the Hamiltonian operates in successive times, is the
first term, q1* GoA. The yo will change
site number 0 to an unoccupied site,
while qı* will change the site number 0
to an occupied site. Thus the term
q1* qo is a term, which simply moves
the occupied site from the location 0 to
the location 1. But this is multiplied by
the matrix A₁ which operates only on
the n register atoms, and therefore multiplies the initial state of the n register
atoms bу А₁.
Now, if the Hamiltonian happens to
operate a second time, this first term
will produce nothing because qo produces 0 on the number 0 site because it
is now unoccupied. The term which can
operate now is the second term,
42* 41A2 for that can move the occupied
point, which I shall call a "cursor." The
cursor can move from site I to site 2 but
the matrix A2 now operates on the register, therefore the register has now got
the matrix A2A1 operating on it.
So, looking at the first line of the
Hamiltonian, if that is all there was to it,
as the Hamiltonian operates in
successive orders, the cursor would
move successively from 0 to k, and you
would acquire, one after the other, oрerating on the n register atoms, the
matrices, A, in the order that we would
like to construct the total М.
However, a Hamiltonian must be hermitian, and therefore the complex conjugate of all these operators must be
present. Suppose that at a given stage,
we have gotten the cursor on site number 2, and we have the matrix A2A
operating on the register. Now the 42
which intends to move that occupation
to a new position, needn't come from
the first line, but may have come from
the second line. It may have come, in
fact, from gi * q2A2* which would move
the cursor back from the position 2 to
the position 1.
But note that when this happens, the
operator A2 * operates on the register,
and therefore the total operator on the
register is A2 *A2A1 in this case. But
A2 * A2 is 1 and therefore the operator is
just A1. Thus we see that when the
cursor is returned to the position 1, the
net result is that only the operator A1
has really operated on the register. Thus
it is that as the various terms of the
Hamiltonian move the cursor forwards
and backwards, the A's accumulate, or
are reduced out again.
At any stage, for example, if the
cursor were up to the j site, the matrices
from A₁ to A, have operated in succesFebruary
sion on the n register. It does not matter
whether or not the cursor on the i site
has arrived there, by going directly
from 0 to j, or going further and returning, or going back and forth in any
pattern whatsoever, as long as it finally
arrived at the state j.
Therefore it is true, that if the cursor
is found at the site k, we have the net
result for the n register atoms that the
matrix M has operated on their initial
state as we desired.
How then could we operate this computer? We begin by putting the input
bits onto the register, and by putting the
cursor to occupy the site 0. We then
check at the site k, say, by scattering
electrons, that the site k is empty, or that
the site k has a cursor. The moment we
find the cursor at site k we remove the
cursor so that it cannot return down the
program line, and then we know that
the register contains the output data.
We can then measure it at our leisure.
Of course, there are external things involved in making the measurements,
and determining all of this, which are
not part of our computer. Surely a computer has eventually to be in interaction
with the external world, both for
putting data in and for taking it out.
Mathematically it turns out that the
propagation of the cursor up and down
this program line is exactly the same as
it would be if the operators A were not
in the Hamiltonian. In other words, it
represents just the waves which are familiar from the propagation of the tight
binding electrons or spin waves in one
dimension, and are very well known.
There are waves that travel up and
down the line and you can have packets
of waves and so forth.
We could improve the action of this
computer and make it into a ballistic
action in the following way. By making
a line of sites in addition to the ones
inside, that we are actually using for
computing, a line of say, many sites,
both before and after. It's just as though
we had values of the index i for q which
are less than 0 and greater than k, each
of which has no matrix A, just a 1 multiplying there. Then we'd have a longer
spin chain, and we could have started,
instead of putting a cursor exactly at the
beginning site 0, by putting the cursor
with different amplitudes on different
sites representing an initial incoming
spin wave, a wide packet of nearly definite momentum.
This spin wave would then go
through the entire computer in a ballistic fashion and out the other end into
the outside tail that we have added to
the line of program sites, and there it
15