---
title: Theory of positrons
author: Richard P. Feynman
year: 1949  
source_type: paper
topic: quantum electrodynamics
source_url: https://coolwisdombooks.com/wp-content/uploads/2020/08/FEYpr49b.pdf

PHYSICAL REVIEW VOLUME 76, NUMBER 6
The Theory of Positrons
R. P. FEYNMAN
Department of Physics, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York
(Received April 8, 1949)
The problem of the behavior of positrons and electrons in given
external potentials, neglecting their mutual interaction, is analyzed
by replacing the theory of holes by a reinterpretation of the solutions of the Dirac equation. It is possible to write down a complete
solution of the problem in terms of boundary conditions on the
wave function, and this solution contains automatically all the
possibilities of virtual (and real) pair formation and annihilation
together with the ordinary scattering processes, including the
correct relative signs of the various terms.
In this solution, the "negative energy states" appear in a form
which may be pictured (as by Stückelberg) in space-time as waves
traveling away from the external potential backwards in time.
Experimentally, such a wave corresponds to a positron approaching the potential and annihilating the electron. A particle moving
forward in time (electron) in a potential may be scattered forward
in time (ordinary scattering) or backward (pair annihilation).
When moving backward (positron) it may be scattered backward
SEPTEMBER 15, 1949
in time (positron scattering) or forward (pair production). For
such a particle the amplitude for transition from an initial to a
final state is analyzed to any order in the potential by considering
it to undergo a sequence of such scatterings.
The amplitude for a process involving many such particles is
the product of the transition amplitudes for each particle. The
exclusion principle requires that antisymmetric combinations of
amplitudes be chosen for those complete processes which differ
only by exchange of particles. It seems that a consistent interpretation is only possible if the exclusion principle is adopted. The
exclusion principle need not be taken into account in intermediate
states. Vacuum problems do not arise for charges which do not
interact with one another, but these are analyzed nevertheless in
anticipation of application to quantum electrodynamics.
The results are also expressed in momentum-energy variables.
Equivalence to the second quantization theory of holes is proved
in an appendix.
1. INTRODUCTION
THIS is the first of a set of papers dealing with the
solution of problems in quantum electrodynamics.
The main principle is to deal directly with the solutions
to the Hamiltonian differential equations rather than
with these equations themselves. Here we treat simply
the motion of electrons and positrons in given external
potentials. In a second paper we consider the interactions
of these particles, that is, quantum electrodynamics.
The problem of charges in a fixed potential is usually
treated by the method of second quantization of the
electron field, using the ideas of the theory of holes.
Instead we show that by a suitable choice and interpretation of the solutions of Dirac's equation the problem may be equally well treated in a manner which is
fundamentally no more complicated than Schrödinger's
method of dealing with one or more particles. The various creation and annihilation operators in the conventional electron field view are required because the
number of particles is not conserved, i.e., pairs may be
created or destroyed. On the other hand charge is
conserved which suggests that if we follow the charge,
not the particle, the results can be simplified.
In the approximation of classical relativistic theory
the creation of an electron pair (electron A, positron B)
might be represented by the start of two world lines
from the point of creation, 1. The world lines of the
positron will then continue until it annihilates another
electron, C, at a world point 2. Between the times t1
and t2 there are then three world lines, before and after
only one. However, the world lines of C, B, and А
together form one continuous line albeit the "positron
part" B of this continuous line is directed backwards
in time. Following the charge rather than the particles
corresponds to considering this continuous world line
as a whole rather than breaking it up into its pieces.
It is as though a bombardier flying low over a road
suddenly sees three roads and it is only when two of
them come together and disappear again that he realizes
that he has simply passed over a long switchback in a
single road.
This over-all space-time point of view leads to considerable simplification in many problems. One can take
into account at the same time processes which ordinarily would have to be considered separately. For
example, when considering the scattering of an electron
by a potential one automatically takes into account the
effects of virtual pair productions. The same equation, Dirac's, which describes the deflection of the world line
of an electron in a field, can also describe the deflection
(and in just as simple a manner) when it is large enough
to reverse the time-sense of the world line, and thereby
correspond to pair annihilation. Quantum mechanically
the direction of the world lines is replaced by the
direction of propagation of waves.
This view is quite different from that of the Hamiltonian method which considers the future as developing
continuously from out of the past. Here we imagine the
entire space-time history laid out, and that we just
become aware of increasing portions of it successively.
In a scattering problem this over-all view of the complete scattering process is similar to the S-matrix viewpoint of Heisenberg. The temporal order of events during the scattering, which is analyzed in such detail by
the Hamiltonian differential equation, is irrelevant. The
relation of these viewpoints will be discussed much more
fully in the introduction to the second paper, in which
the more complicated interactions are analyzed.
The development stemmed from the idea that in nonrelativistic quantum mechanics the amplitude for a
given process can be considered as the sum of an ampli749
750 R. P. FEYNMAN
tude for each space-time path available.¹ In view of the
fact that in classical physics positrons could be viewed
as electrons proceeding along world lines toward the
past (reference 7) the attempt was made to remove, in
the relativistic case, the restriction that the paths must
proceed always in one direction in time. It was discovered that the results could be even more easily
understood from a more familiar physical viewpoint,
that of scattered waves. This viewpoint is the one used
in this paper. After the equations were worked out
physically the proof of the equivalence to the second
quantization theory was found.2
First we discuss the relation of the Hamiltonian
differentialequation to its solution, using for an example
the Schrödinger equation. Next we deal in an analogous
way with the Dirac equation and show how the solutions may be interpreted to apply to positrons. The
interpretation seems not to be consistent unless the
electrons obey the exclusion principle. (Charges obeying
the Klein-Gordon equations can be described in an
analogous manner, but here consistency apparently
requires Bose statistics.)3 A representation in momentum and energy variables which is useful for the calculation of matrix elements is described. A proof of the
equivalence of the method to the theory of holes in
second quantization is given in the Appendix.
2. GREEN'S FUNCTION TREATMENT OF
SCHRÖDINGER'S EQUATION
We begin by a brief discussion of the relation of the
non-relativistic wave equation to its solution. The ideas
will then be extended to relativistic particles, satisfying
Dirac's equation, and finally in the succeeding paper to
interacting relativistic particles, that is, quantum
electrodynamics.
The Schrödinger equation
i04/ət=H, (1)
describes the change in the wave function & in an
infinitesimal time At as due to the operation of an
operator exp(-iHAt). One can ask also, if (X1, t₁) is
the wave function at x₁ at time t, what is the wave
function at time t2>₁? It can always be written as
W(xs, ta) = fK(xs, l;ts; X,h)P(x1, h)dx, (2)
where K is a Green's function for the linear Eq. (1).
(We have limited ourselves to a single particle of coordinate x, but the equations are obviously of greater
generality.) If H is a constant operator having eigenvalues En, eigenfunctions n so that 4(x, 1) can be expanded as n Cnn(x), then 4(x, t2)=exp(-iEn(12-11))
ХСиФп(х). Since Cn=S $»*(x1)&(X1, t1)dX1, one finds
1 R. P. Feynman, Rev. Mod. Phys. 20, 367 (1948).
The equivalence of the entire procedure (including photon
interactions) with the work of Schwinger and Tomonaga has been
demonstrated by F. J. Dyson, Phys. Rev. 75, 486 (1949).
3 These are special examples of the general relation of spin and
statistics deduced by W. Pauli, Phys. Rev. 58, 716 (1940).
(where we write 1 for X1, 1 and 2 for x2, t2) in this case
Κ(2, 1)= Σ φn(X2)φn*(x1) exp(-iEn(t2-tι)), (3)
for t2>1. We shall find it convenient for t2<t₁ to define
K(2, 1)=0 (Eq. (2) is then not valid for ta<t₁). It is
then readily shown that in general K can be defined by
that solution of
(id/t-H2) K(2, 1) = (2, 1), (4)
which is zero for t2<11, where 8(2, 1)=8(t2-11)8(x2-x1)
X8(y2-y1)8(z2-21) and the subscript 2 on H₂ means
that the operator acts on the variables of 2 of K(2, 1).
When H is not constant, (2) and (4) are valid but K is
less easy to evaluate than (3).4
We can call K(2, 1) the total amplitude for arrival
at X2, t2 starting from X1, t1. (It results from adding an
amplitude, expiS,for each space time path between these
points, where S is the action along the path.¹) The
transition amplitude for finding a particle in state
X(x2, t2) at time t2, if at t₁ it was in (x1, 1), is
fx(Q)K(Q, 1)4()Pxdx: (5)
A quantum mechanical system is described equally well
by specifying the function K, or by specifying the
Hamiltonian H from which it results. For some purposes
the specification in terms of K is easier to use and
visualize. We desire eventually to discuss quantum
electrodynamics from this point of view.
To gain a greater familiarity with the K function and
the point of view it suggests, we consider a simple
perturbation problem. Imagine we have a particle in
a weak potential U(x, t), a function of position and
time. We wish to calculate K(2,1) if U differs from
zero only for t between t1 and t2. We shall expand K in
increasing powers of U:
K(2, 1) = Ko (2, 1)+K) (2,1)+K) (2,1) + ････ (6)
To zero order in U, K is that for a free particle, Ko(2, 1).4
To study the first order correction K( (2, 1), first consider the case that U differs from zero only for the
infinitesimal time interval Atz between some time 13
and t3+Al3(t1<t3<t2). Then if (1) is the wave function
at X1, 1, the wave function at xa, ta is
4(3)= f Ko(3, 1)4(1)dx (7)
since from ti to t3 the particle is free. For the short
interval At3 we solve (1) as
4(x, l3+Al3)=exp(-iHAt3)(x, t3)
=(1-iH,At3-iUAtz)4(x, ts),
4For a non-relativistic free particle, where ф=еxp(ip x), En=p²/2m, (3) gives, as is well known
Ko(2, 1) = exp[-(ip.x-ip.x2)-ip(12-t₁)/2m]d³p(2m)-3
= (2rim 1(12-41))-3 exp(}im(x2-x1)2(t-t₁)-1)
for t2>1, and Ko=0 for 2<1.
THEORY OF POSITRONS
SCATTERED
WAVE Ko(2,3) where we put H=H+U, H being the Hamiltonian
of a free particle. Thus (x, t3+A13) differs from
what it would be if the potential were zero (namely
(1-iHAt3)4(x, t3)) by the extra piece
A4=-iU (x3, l3) (X3, t3)Al3, (8)
which we shall call the amplitude scattered by the
potential. The wave function at 2 is given by
(x, 1)= Ko(x, i , 1at A) ¥(8s, 1+ A)d"xs,
since after 13+At3 the particle is again free. Therefore
the change in the wave function at 2 brought about by
the potential is (substitute (7) into (8) and (8) into
the equation for 4(x2, 12)):
A4(2)=-i K(2, 3) U(3)K,(3, 1)4(1)d®x₁d®x®s.
In the case that the potential exists for an extended
time, it may be looked upon as a sum of effects from
each interval Atz so that the total effect is obtained by
integrating over t3 as well as x3. From the definition (2)
of K then, we find
K(2, 1)=-if Кo(2, 3) V(3)Ko(3, 1)drs, (9)
where the integral can now be extended over all space
and time, dr3=d³xadta. Automatically there will be no
contribution if t3 is outside the range ti to t2 because of
our definition, Ko(2, 1)=0 for l2<11.
We can understand the result (6), (9) this way. We
can imagine that a particle travels as a free particle
from point to point, but is scattered by the potential U.
Thus the total amplitude for arrival at 2 from 1 can
be considered as the sum of the amplitudes for various
alternative routes. It may go directly from 1 to 2
(amplitude Ko(2, 1), giving the zero order term in (6)).
Or (see Fig. 1(a)) it may go from 1 to 3 (amplitude
Ko(3, 1)), get scattered there by the potential (scattering amplitude -iU(3) per unit volume and time) and
then go from 3 to 2 (amplitude Ko(2, 3)). This may
occur for any point 3 so that summing over these
alternatives gives (9).
Again, it may be scattered twice by the potential
(Fig. 1(b)). It goes from 1 to 3 (K(3, 1)), gets scattered
there (-iU (3)) then proceeds to some other point, 4,
in space time (amplitude Ko(4, 3)) is scattered again
(-iU(4)) and then proceeds to 2 (Ko(2, 4)). Summing
over all possible places and times for 3, 4 find that the
second order contribution to the total amplitude
K(2) (2, 1) is
(- √[ K(2,+(L4)K%(4, 3)
XU(3)K(3, 1) dT3dT4. (10)
This can be readily verified directly from (1) just as (9)
トー
INCIDENT WAVES
K(2,4)
K(4,3)CONTAINS ENERGIESN
14MUST BE CAAr4
SPACE
(a) FIRST ORDER, EQ (9) (b) SECOND ORDER, EQ (1O)
751
FIG. 1. The Schrödinger (and Dirac) equation can be visualized
as describing the fact that plane waves are scattered successively by a potential. Figure 1 (a) illustrates the situation in first order.
Ko(2, 3) is the amplitude for a free particle starting at point 3
to arrive at 2. The shaded region indicates the presence of the
potential A which scatters at 3 with amplitude -iA(3) per
cm³sec. (Eq. (9)). In (b) is illustrated the second order process (Eq. (10)), the waves scattered at 3 are scattered again at 4. However, in Dirac one-electron theory Ko(4, 3) would represent electrons both of positive and of negative energies proceeding from
3 to 4. This is remedied by choosing a different scattering kernel
K+(4, 3), Fig. 2.
was. One can in this way obviously write down any of
the terms of the expansion (6).5
3. TREATMENT OF THE DIRAC EQUATION
We shall now extend the method of the last section
to apply to the Dirac equation. All that would seem
to be necessary in the previous equations is to consider
II as the Dirac Hamiltonian, & as a symbol with four
indices (for each particle). Then Ko can still be defined
by (3) or (4) and is now a 4-4 matrix which operating
on the initial wave function, gives the final wave function. In (10), U(3) can be generalized to A4(3)-α A(3)
where A4, A are the scalar and vector potential (times e,
the electron charge) and a are Dirac matrices.
To discuss this we shall define a convenient relativistic notation. We represent four-vectors like x, t by
a symbol x, where μ=1, 2, 3, 4 and x4=t is real. Thus
the vector and scalar potential (times e) A, A4 is A
The four matrices Ba, B can be considered as transforming as a four vector Ya (our yu differs from Pauli's by a
factor i for µ=1, 2, 3). We use the summation convention ab=a1b4-a1b1-a2b2—a3b3=a·b. In particular if
a is any four vector (but not a matrix) we write
a= aY" so that a is a matrix associated with a vector
(a will often be used in place of a as a symbol for the
vector). The Yu satisfy YuYot Yuya=20, where 844= +1,
811=892=833=-1, and the other 8, are zero. As a
consequence of our summation convention б
and uu=4.Note that ab+ba=2a.b and that =da
= a a is a pure number. The symbol 0 0x will mean
0/0t for µ=4, and-0/дл, -/ду, -002 for =1,
2, 3. Call V=70/0x=Ba/0l+Ba.We shall imagine
We are simply solving by successive approximations ann int integral
equation (deducible directly from (1) with H=Ho+U and (4)
with II= I),
4(2)=-i√'K(2, 3)U(3)4(3)drs+ fK(2, 1)¥(1)dx,
where the first integral extends over all space and all times ta
greater than the t1 appearing in the second term, and t2>.
752 R. P. FEYNMAN
(2,3), POS
A
K4 (2,3), NEG E
(a) FIRST ORDER, EQ (13)
MOTION OF
POSITRON
A4)
K
CONTAINS ONLY POS. E.
A(3)
CONTAINS ONLY
NEG E
(b) VIRTUAL SCATTERING (c) VIRTUAL PAIR
14>13 t4<t3
SECOND ORDER, EQ. (14)
FIG. 2. The Dirac equation permits another solution K4(2, 1)
if one considers that waves scattered by the potential can proceed
backwards in time as in Fig. 2 (a). This is interpreted in the second
order processes (b), (c), by noting that there is now the possibility (c) of virtual pair production at 4, the positron going to 3
to be annihilated. This can be pictured as similar to ordinary
scattering (b) except that the electron is scattered backwards in
time from 3 to 4. The waves scattered from 3 to 2' in (a) represent
the possibility of a positron arriving at 3 from 2' and annihilating
the electron from 1. This view is proved equivalent to hole theory:
electrons traveling backwards in time are recognized as positrons.
hereafter, purely for relativistic convenience, that *
in (3) is replaced by its adjoint = $n*3.
Thus the Dirac equation for a particle, mass m, in an
external field A=AY is
(iV-m)4= A4, (11)
and Eq. (4) determining the propagation of a free
particle becomes
(iV2-m)K+(2, 1)=i8(2, 1), (12)
the index 2 on V indicating differentiation with respect
to the coordinates * which are represented as 2 in
K+(2, 1) and 8(2, 1).
The function K4(2, 1) is defined in the absence of a
field. If a potential A is acting a similar function, say
K+(4) (2, 1) can be defined. It differs from K+(2, 1) by a
first order correction given by the analogue of (9)
namely
K(2, 1)=-ifK,(2, 3)A(3)K„(3, 1)dr3, (13)
representing the amplitude to go from 1 to 3 as a free
particle, get scattered there by the potential (now the
matrix A(3) instead of U(3)) and continue to 2 as free.
The second order correction, analogous to (10) is
K(2,1)=-JJK,(2, 4)A(4)
XK+(4, 3)A(3)K+(3, 1)dT4dT3, (14)
and so on. In general K+(4) satisfies
(iV2-A(2)-m)K+(4) (2, 1)=i8(2, 1), (15)
and the successive terms (13), (14) are the powet series
expansion of the integral equation
K(A) (2, 1)= K4 (2, 1)
-ifK,(2, 3)A(3)K14(3, 1)dra, (16)
which it also satisfies.
We would now expect to choose, for the special solution of (12), K=Ko where Ko(2, 1) vanishes for t2<t
and for t2>t₁ is given by (3) where and En are the
eigenfunctions and energy values of a particle satisfying Dirac's equation, and * is replaced by $Фл.
The formulas arising from this choice, however, suffer
from the drawback that they apply to the one electron
theory of Dirac rather than to the hole theory of the
positron. For example, consider as in Fig. 1(a) an
electron after being scattered by a potential in a small
region 3 of space time. The one electron theory says
(as does (3) with K+=K₁) that the scattered amplitude
at another point 2 will proceed toward positive times
with both positive and negative energies, that is with
both positive and negative rates of change of phase. No
wave is scattered to times previous to the time of
scattering. These are just the properties of Ko(2, 3).
On the other hand, according to the positron theory
negative energy states are not available to the electron
after the scattering. Therefore the choice K+=Ko is
unsatisfactory. But there are other solutions of (12).
We shall choose the solution defining K+(2, 1) so that
K+(2, 1) for 12>11 is the sum of (3) over positive energy
states only. Now this new solution must satisfy (12) for
all times in order that the representation be complete.
It must therefore differ from the old solution Ko by a
solution of the homogeneous Dirac equation. It is clear
from the definition that the difference Ko-K+ is the
sum of (3) over all negative energy states, as long as
>1. But this difference must be a solution of the
homogeneous Dirac equation for all times and must
therefore be represented by the same sum over negative
energy states also for t2<₁. Since Ko=0 in this case,
it follows that our new kernel, K4(2, 1), for ta<t₁ is the
negative of the sum (3) over negative energy states. That is,
Κ+(2, 1) = ΣΡος Επ Φ(2)Φ.(1)
Xexp(-iEn(t2-11)) for t2t
=-ZNEG En $n(2) n(1)
Xexp(-iEn(t2-t1)) for t2<1.
(17)
With this choice of K+ our equations such as (13) and (14) will now give results equivalent to those of the
positron hole theory.
That (14), for example, is the correct second order
expression for finding at 2 an electron originally at 1
according to the positron theory may be seen as follows
(Fig. 2). Assume as a special example that t2>1 and
that the potential vanishes except in interval t-11 so
that 4 and t3 both lie between t₁ and t2.
First suppose t4>t3 (Fig. 2(b)). Then (since t3>11)