---
title: Quantum Electrodynamics: The Strange Theory of Light and Matter
author: Richard P. Feynman
year: 1985
source_type: book
topic: "quantum mechanics, electrodynamics, QED, photons, electrons, path integrals, particle physics"
source_url: https://faculty.washington.edu/seattle/physics441/feynman-QED/qed2.pdf
---

QED
THE STRANGE THEORY OF LIGHT AND MATTER
By RICHARD P. FEYNMAN
Chapter One
INTRODUCTION
Alix Mautner was very curious about physics and often asked me to explain things to her. I would do all
right, just as I do with a group of students at Caltech that come to me for an hour on Thursdays, but
eventually I'd fail at what is to me the most interesting part: We would always get hung up on the crazy
ideas of quantum mechanics. I told her I couldn't explain these ideas in an hour or an evening-it would
take a long time-but I promised her that someday I'd prepare a set of lectures on the subject.
I prepared some lectures, and I went to New Zealand to try them out-because New Zealand is far enough
away that if they weren't successful, it would be all right! Well, the people in New Zealand thought they
were okay, so I guess they're okay-at least for New Zealand! So here are the lectures I really prepared for
Alix, but unfortunately I can't tell them to her directly, now.
What I'd like to talk about is a part of physics that is known, rather than a part that is unknown. People are
always asking for the latest developments in the unification of this theory with that theory, and they don't
give us a chance to tell them anything about one of the theories that we know pretty well. They always
want to know things that we don't know. So, rather than confound you with a lot of half-cooked, partially
analyzed theories, I would like to tell you about a subject that has been very thoroughly analyzed. I love
this area of physics and I think it's wonderful: it is called quantum electrodynamics, or QED for short.
My main purpose in these lectures is to describe as accurately as I can the strange theory of light and
matter-or more specifically, the interaction of light and electrons. It's going to take a long time to explain
all the things I want to. However, there are four lectures, so I'm going to take my time, and we will get
everything all right.
Physics has a history of synthesizing many phenomena into a few theories. For instance, in the early days
there were phenomena of motion and phenomena of heat; there were phenomena of sound, of light, and
of gravity. But it was soon discovered, after Sir Isaac Newton explained the laws of motion, that some of
these apparently different things were aspects of the same thing. For example, the phenomena of sound
could be completely understood as the motion of atoms in the air. So sound was no longer considered
something in addition to motion. It was also discovered that heat phenomena are easily understandable
from the laws of motion. In this way, great globs of physics theory were synthesized into a simplified
© Copyright, Princeton University Press. No part of this book may be
distributed, posted, or reproduced in any form by digital or mechanical
means without prior written permission of the publisher.
For general queries, contact webmaster@press.princeton.edu
theory. The theory of gravitation, on the other hand, was not understandable from the laws of motion, and
even today it stands isolated from the other theories. Gravitation is, so far, not understandable in terms of
other phenomena.
After the synthesis of the phenomena of motion, sound, and heat, there was the discovery of a number of
phenomena that we call electrical and magnetic. In 1873 these phenomena were synthesized with the
phenomena of light and optics into a single theory by James Clerk Maxwell, who proposed that light is an
electromagnetic wave. So at that stage, there were the laws of motion, the laws of electricity and
magnetism, and the laws of gravity.
Around 1900 a theory was developed to explain what matter was. It was called the electron theory of
matter, and it said that there were little charged particles inside of atoms. This theory evolved gradually to
include a heavy nucleus with electrons going around it.
Attempts to understand the motion of the electrons going around the nucleus by using mechanical lawsanalogous to the way Newton used the laws of motion to figure out how the earth went around the sunwere a real failure: all kinds of predictions came out wrong. (Incidentally, the theory of relativity, which
you all understand to be a great revolution in physics, was also developed at about that time. But
compared to this discovery that Newton's laws of motion were quite wrong in atoms, the theory of
relativity was only a minor modification.) Working out another system to replace Newton's laws took a
long time because phenomena at the atomic level were quite strange. One had to lose one's common sense
in order to perceive what was happening at the atomic level. Finally, in 1926, an "uncommon-sensy"
theory was developed to explain the "new type of behavior" of electrons in matter. It looked cockeyed,
but in reality it was not: it was called the theory of quantum mechanics. The word "quantum" refers to
this peculiar aspect of nature that goes against common sense. It is this aspect that I am going to tell you
about.
The theory of quantum mechanics also explained all kinds of details, such as why an oxygen atom
combines with two hydrogen atoms to make water, and so on. Quantum mechanics thus supplied the
theory behind chemistry. So, fundamental theoretical chemistry is really physics.
Because the theory of quantum mechanics could explain all of chemistry and the various properties of
substances, it was a tremendous success. But still there was the problem of the interaction of light and
matter. That is, Maxwell's theory of electricity and magnetism had to be changed to be in accord with the
new principles of quantum mechanics that had been developed. So a new theory, the quantum theory of
the interaction of light and matter, which is called by the horrible name "quantum electrodynamics," was
finally developed by a number of physicists in 1929.
But the theory was troubled. If you calculated something roughly, it would give a reasonable answer. But
if you tried to compute it more accurately, you would find that the correction you thought was going to be
small (the next term in a series, for example) was in fact very large-in fact, it was infinity! So it turned out
you couldn't really compute anything beyond a certain accuracy.
© Copyright, Princeton University Press. No part of this book may be
distributed, posted, or reproduced in any form by digital or mechanical
means without prior written permission of the publisher.
For general queries, contact webmaster@press.princeton.edu
By the way, what I have just outlined is what I call a "physicist's history of physics," which is never
correct. What I am telling you is a sort of conventionalized myth-story that the physicists tell to their
students, and those students tell to their students, and is not necessarily related to the actual historical
development, which I do not really know!
At any rate, to continue with this "history," Paul Dirac, using the theory of relativity, made a relativistic
theory of the electron that did not completely take into account all the effects of the electron's interaction
with light. Dirac's theory said that an electron had a magnetic moment-something like the force of a little
magnet-that had a strength of exactly 1 in certain units. Then in about 1948 it was discovered in
experiments that the actual number was closer to 1.00118 (with an uncertainty of about 3 on the last
digit). It was known, of course, that electrons interact with light, so some small correction was expected.
It was also expected that this correction would be understandable from the new theory of quantum
electrodynamics. But when it was calculated, instead of 1.00118 the result was infinity-which is wrong,
experimentally!
Well, this problem of how to calculate things in quantum electrodynamics was straightened out by Julian
Schwinger, Sin-Itiro Tomonaga, and myself in about 1948. Schwinger was the first to calculate this
correction using a new "shell game"; his theoretical value was around 1.00116, which was close enough
to the experimental number to show that we were on the right track. At last, we had a quantum theory of
electricity and magnetism with which we could calculate! This is the theory that I am going to describe to
you.
The theory of quantum electrodynamics has now lasted for more than fifty years, and has been tested
more and more accurately over a wider and wider range of conditions. At the present time I can proudly
say that there is no significant difference between experiment and theory!
Just to give you an idea of how the theory has been put through the wringer, I'll give you some recent
numbers: experiments have Dirac's number at 1.00115965221 (with an uncertainty of about 4 in the last
digit); the theory puts it at 1.00115965246 (with an uncertainty of about five times as much). To give you
a feeling for the accuracy of these numbers, it comes out something like this: If you were to measure the
distance from Los Angeles to New York to this accuracy, it would be exact to the thickness of a human
hair. That's how delicately quantum electrodynamics has, in the past fifty years, been checked-both
theoretically and experimentally. By the way, I have chosen only one number to show you. There are
other things in quantum electrodynamics that have been measured with comparable accuracy, which also
agree very well. Things have been checked at distance scales that range from one hundred times the size
of the earth down to one-hundredth the size of an atomic nucleus. These numbers are meant to intimidate
you into believing that the theory is probably not too far off! Before we're through, I'll describe how these
calculations are made.
I would like to again impress you with the vast range of phenomena that the theory of quantum
electrodynamics describes: It's easier to say it backwards: the theory describes all the phenomena of the
physical world except the gravitational effect, the thing that holds you in your seats (actually, that's a
© Copyright, Princeton University Press. No part of this book may be
distributed, posted, or reproduced in any form by digital or mechanical
means without prior written permission of the publisher.
For general queries, contact webmaster@press.princeton.edu
combination of gravity and politeness, I think), and radioactive phenomena, which involve nuclei shifting
in their energy levels. So if we leave out gravity and radioactivity (more properly, nuclear physics), what
have we got left? Gasoline burning in automobiles, foam and bubbles, the hardness of salt or copper, the
stiffness of steel. In fact, biologists are trying to interpret as much as they can about life in terms of
chemistry, and as I already explained, the theory behind chemistry is quantum electrodynamics.
I must clarify something: When I say that all the phenomena of the physical world can be explained by
this theory, we don't really know that. Most phenomena we are familiar with involve such tremendous
numbers of electrons that it's hard for our poor minds to follow that complexity. In such situations, we
can use the theory to figure roughly what ought to happen and that is what happens, roughly, in those
circumstances. But if we arrange in the laboratory an experiment involving just a few electrons in simple
circumstances, then we can calculate what might happen very accurately, and we can measure it very
accurately, too. Whenever we do such experiments, the theory of quantum electrodynamics works very
well.
We physicists are always checking to see if there is something the matter with the theory. That's the
game, because if there is something the matter, it's interesting! But so far, we have found nothing wrong
with the theory of quantum electrodynamics. It is, therefore, I would say, the jewel of physics-our
proudest possession.
The theory of quantum electrodynamics is also the prototype for new theories that attempt to explain
nuclear phenomena, the things that go on inside the nuclei of atoms. If one were to think of the physical
world as a stage, then the actors would be not only electrons, which are outside the nucleus in atoms, but
also quarks and gluons and so forth-dozens of kinds of particles-inside the nucleus. And though these
"actors" appear quite different from one another, they all act in a certain style-a strange and peculiar stylethe "quantum" style. At the end, I'll tell you a little bit about the nuclear particles. In the meantime, I'm
only going to tell you about photons-particles of light-and electrons, to keep it simple. Because it's the
way they act that is important, and the way they act is very interesting. So now you know what I'm going
to talk about. The next question is, will you understand what I'm going to tell you? Everybody who
comes to a scientific lecture knows they are not going to understand it, but maybe the lecturer has a nice,
colored tie to look at. Not in this case! (Feynman is not wearing a tie.)
What I am going to tell you about is what we teach our physics students in the third or fourth year of
graduate school-and you think I'm going to explain it to you so you can understand it? No, you're not
going to be able to understand it. Why, then, am I going to bother you with all this? Why are you going to
sit here all this time, when you won't be able to understand what I am going to say? It is my task to
convince you not to turn away because you don't understand it. You see, my physics students don't
understand it either. That is because I don't understand it. Nobody does.
I'd like to talk a little bit about understanding. When we have a lecture, there are many reasons why you
might not understand the speaker. One is, his language is bad-he doesn't say what he means to say, or he
says it upside down-and it's hard to understand. That's a rather trivial matter, and I'll try my best to avoid
too much of my New York accent.
© Copyright, Princeton University Press. No part of this book may be
distributed, posted, or reproduced in any form by digital or mechanical
means without prior written permission of the publisher.
For general queries, contact webmaster@press.princeton.edu
Another possibility, especially if the lecturer is a physicist, is that he uses ordinary words in a funny way.
Physicists often use ordinary words such as "work" or "action" or "energy" or even, as you shall see,
"light" for some technical purpose. Thus, when I talk about "work" in physics, I don't mean the same
thing as when I talk about "work" on the street. During this lecture I might use one of those words
without noticing that it is being used in this unusual way. I'll try my best to catch myself-that's my job-but
it is an error that is easy to make.
The next reason that you might think you do not understand what I am telling you is, while I am
describing to you how Nature works, you won't understand why Nature works that way. But you see,
nobody understands that. I can't explain why Nature behaves in this peculiar way.
Finally, there is this possibility: after I tell you something, you just can't believe it. You can't accept it.
You don't like it. A little screen comes down and you don't listen anymore. I'm going to describe to you
how Nature is-and if you don't like it, that's going to get in the way of your understanding it. It's a
problem that physicists have learned to deal with: They've learned to realize that whether they like a
theory or they don't like a theory is not the essential question. Rather, it is whether or not the theory gives
predictions that agree with experiment. It is not a question of whether a theory is philosophically
delightful, or easy to understand, or perfectly reasonable from the point of view of common sense. The
theory of quantum electrodynamics describes Nature as absurd from the point of view of common sense.
And it agrees fully with experiment.
Continues...

CHAPTER 2:
2
Photons:
Particles of Light
This is the second in a series of lectures about quantum
electrodynamics, and since it's clear that none of you were
here last time (because I told everyone that they weren't
going to understand anything), I'll briefly summarize the
first lecture.
We were talking about light. The first important feature
about light is that it appears to be particles: when very weak
monochromatic light (light of one color) hits a detector,
the detector makes equally loud clicks less and less often
as the light gets dimmer.
The other important feature about light discussed in the
first lecture is partial reflection of monochromatic light. An
average of 4% of the photons hitting a single surface of
glass is reflected. This is already a deep mystery, since it is
impossible to predict which photons will bounce back and
which will go through. With a second surface, the results
are strange: instead of the expected reflection of 8% by the
two surfaces, the partial reflection can be amplified as high
as 16% or turned off, depending on the thickness of the
glass.
This strange phenomenon of partial reflection by two
surfaces can be explained for intense light by a theory of
waves, but the wave theory cannot explain howthe detector
Photons: Particles of Light 37
makes equally loud clicks as the light gets dimmer. Quantum electrodynamics "resolves" this wave-particle duality
by saying that light is made of particles (as Newton originally thought), but the price of this great advancement of
science is a retreat by physics to the position of being able
to calculate only the probability that a photon will hit a detector, without offering a good model of how it actually
happens.
In the first lecture I described how physicists calculate
the probability that a particular event will happen. They
draw some arrows on a piece of paper according to some
rules, which go as follows:
-GRAND PRINCIPLE: The probability of an event is equal
to the square of the length of an arrow called the "probability amplitude." An arrow of length 0.4, for example,
represents a probability of 0.16, or 16%.
-GENERAL RULE for drawing arrows if an event can happen in alternative ways: Draw an arrow for each way,
and then combine the arrows ("add" them) by hooking
the head of one to the tail of the next. A "final arrow"
is then drawn from the tail of the first arrow to the head
of the last one. The final arrow is the one whose square
gives the probability of the entire event.
There were also some specific rules for drawing arrows in
the case of partial reflection by glass (they can be found on
pages 26 and 27).
All of the preceding is a review of the first lecture.
What I would like to do now is show you how this model
of the world, which is so utterly different from anything
you've ever seen before (that perhaps you hope never to
see it again), can explain all the simple properties of light
that you know: when light reflects off a mirror, the angle
of incidence is equal to the angle of reflection; light bends
when it goes from air into water; light goes in straight lines;