---
title: Six Not So Easy Pieces (Complete Book)
author: Richard P. Feynman
year: 1997
source_type: book
topic: [physics, quantum mechanics, relativity, atomic mechanics, conservation of energy, gravity]
source_url: https://cdn.bookey.app/files/pdf/book/en/six-not-so-easy-pieces.pdf
---
Six Not-So-Easy Pieces 
Richard P. Feynman
Six Not-So-Easy Pieces
Exploring Einstein’s Relativity Through Feynman’s
Engaging Lectures.
Written by Bookey
Check more about Six Not-So-Easy Pieces Summary
About the book
In "Six Not-So-Easy Pieces," renowned physicist Richard P.
Feynman expands upon his earlier work to explore the
profound implications of Einstein's Theory of Relativity—one
of the most significant breakthroughs in twentieth-century
physics. Building on the popularity of his earlier lectures, this
book presents six additional lectures that, while slightly more
challenging, delve into the intricate and often counterintuitive
concepts of time, mass, and the constancy of light. Feynman’s
unique blend of clarity, wit, and enthusiasm transforms these
complex ideas into a captivating journey, revealing their
beauty and elegance. With his unparalleled ability to explain
the seemingly unexplainable, Feynman makes these
revolutionary concepts accessible to both scientists and
curious minds alike.
About the author
Richard Phillips Feynman was a renowned American physicist
celebrated for his groundbreaking contributions to quantum
mechanics, quantum electrodynamics, and the superfluidity of
liquid helium. He received the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1965
for his work in quantum electrodynamics, which he shared
with Julian Schwinger and Sin-Itiro Tomonaga. Feynman is
well-known for his development of Feynman diagrams, a
visual tool that revolutionized the understanding of subatomic
particle interactions. Beyond his theoretical achievements, he
played a role in the Manhattan Project and contributed to the
investigation of the Space Shuttle Challenger disaster. A
pioneer in quantum computing and nanotechnology, Feynman
also held the Richard Chace Tolman professorship at Caltech,
solidifying his legacy as one of the most influential scientists
of his time.
ow to Talk ds So Will Listen sten
Talk en So Kids
ds
UNIINENT
Worid War
WORK RULES
Don Quixote
Sade of an Cde
The AVING Making of Beha Economics
BOUNDARIES
WITH
KIDS
Scan to Download
ng.Mortal
A LITTLE
HISTORY
OF THE WORLD
JERUSALEМ
VIVRE
tbe biogrophy
TheWillpower Instioct
METAPHORS
WE LIVE By
El Arte
Narrar
 de
Cuntsheu by
THE
MINTO
YRAMID
INCIPLE THE METAMORPHOSIS
PARLEZ-VEUS
MANIERE
 DE
 ERE DROLE ORRО
summary of world best books
FAST AND SLOW ney into
How we make decisions
Mastering the art of power, to
have the strength to confront
complicated situations
s to build
habits and break bad ones
HIGHLY
EFFECTIVE
PEOPLE
TO ANYONE Don
Unlocking the Secrets of
Effective Communication
Satire ofChiva2
Max
Summary Content List
Chapter 1 : VECTORS
Chapter 2 : SYMMETRY IN PHYSICAL LAWS
Chapter 3 : THE SPECIAL THEORY OF RELATIVITY
Chapter 4 : RELATIVISTIC ENERGY AND MOMENTUM
Chapter 5 : SPACE-TIME
Chapter 6 : CURVED SPACE
Chapter 1 Summary : VECTORS
Chapter 1: Vectors
1-1 Symmetry in Physics

This section introduces the concept of symmetry in physical
laws, defined by Professor Hermann Weyl as the property of
a system appearing the same after an operation, such as
rotation or translation. It emphasizes the necessity of
common sense in physics; if machines with similar setups
behave differently when moved, something relevant may
have been overlooked. Understanding whether laws of
physics maintain symmetry under various conditions guides
physicists in their investigations.
1-2 Translations

The discussion focuses on mechanics, using equations that
summarize laws governing particle motion. It highlights the
irrelevance of the origin's position—whether at a universal
center or elsewhere—because multiple observers (Joe and
Moe) will derive the same laws despite different coordinate
systems. This asserts that physical laws are invariant under
translation, meaning they do not change regardless of where
the observations are made.
1-3 Rotations

The next proposition deals with the directionality of axes,
noting that the behavior of systems changes depending on
external forces, such as gravity affecting a pendulum clock.
Predictions can be made about similar apparatus in different
orientations based on the need to account for external
influences ensuring that systems operate consistently within
their contexts.
1-4 Vectors

This section delves into the concept of vectors—quantities
that possess both direction and magnitude, such as force and
velocity. It asserts that vectors are represented as
three-dimensional numerical sets but treated as single
symbols for simplicity in mathematical expressions. Thus,
any physical quantity transforming like position vectors is
classified as a vector.
1-5 Vector Algebra

The rules for manipulating vectors are established. Vectors
can be added or subtracted based on their components, and
the resultant vector maintains the properties of directional
quantities, adhering to linear transformation rules.
1-6 Newton’s Laws in Vector Notation

Newton’s laws are expressed in vector form, reiterating their
invariance across different coordinate frames. This facilitates
simplification, allowing one generalized force equation to
represent the laws sufficiently.
1-7 Scalar Product of Vectors

The notion of the scalar product (dot product) is introduced
as a way to derive scalars from vectors. The identities
established within various coordinate systems demonstrate a
consistent and unique scalar quantity that arises from the
interaction of two vectors. The chapter concludes with
applications of dot products in physics, such as work done
and kinetic energy.
Overall, the chapter lays a foundational understanding of
symmetry, vectors, and their applications in the context of
physical laws, paving the way for future exploration in
physics.
Chapter 2 Summary : SYMMETRY IN
PHYSICAL LAWS
Section Content Summary
2-1 Introduction to
Symmetry Operations
Discusses the importance of symmetry in physics and its manifestations in nature, defining
symmetry as operations that preserve characteristics of systems.
2-2 Symmetry in Space
and Time
Explores key spatial symmetries involving translation, rotation, and uniform motion, noting that
physical laws remain invariant under these transformations.
2-3 Symmetry and
Conservation Laws
Introduces the link between symmetries in quantum mechanics and conservation laws, such as
momentum conservation and phase-related symmetries.
2-4 Mirror Reflections Examines whether physical laws maintain symmetry under spatial reflection, using examples like
mirror-image clocks to discuss "right" and "left".
2-5 Polar and Axial
Vectors
Differentiates between polar and axial vectors, showing their behavior under reflection symmetry
and how orientation changes affect outcomes in calculations.
2-6 Which Hand is
Right?
Presents the challenge of defining directionality to a Martian, highlighting the complexities of
determining "right" and "left" within symmetrical frameworks.
2-7 Parity is Not
Conserved!
Discusses the discovery in particle physics that conservation of parity does not apply universally,
revealing asymmetries in weak decay processes.
2-8 Antimatter Examines the concept of antimatter, detailing how particles interact with their corresponding
antiparticles and the implications for symmetry in physical laws.
2-9 Broken Symmetries Concludes with considerations of nearly symmetric laws in nature, emphasizing that some
processes exhibit symmetry while others do not, prompting deeper inquiries.
Chapter 2: Symmetry in Physical Laws
2-1 Symmetry Operations

This chapter discusses the significance of symmetry in the
laws of physics, emphasizing that nature often exhibits
symmetrical characteristics, such as spherical shapes in
celestial bodies and symmetry in crystals. Symmetry is
defined as an operation that preserves the appearance or
characteristics of an object or system. In physical
phenomena, this can involve various transformations that do
not alter outcomes, listed in Table 2-1.
2-2 Symmetry in Space and Time

Key spatial symmetries involve translation in space and time,
rotation, and uniform motion, suggesting that the laws of
physics remain unchanged under these transformations.
symmetry, as many types of atoms behave in the same way
when interchanged.
2-3 Symmetry and Conservation Laws

The chapter introduces the connection between symmetries
and conservation laws in quantum mechanics. Each
symmetry corresponds to a conservation law, such as
momentum conservation linked to spatial translation
symmetry. Other symmetries in quantum mechanics are
noted, particularly concerning the phase of wave functions.
2-4 Mirror Reflections

A central question explored is whether physical laws
maintain symmetry under spatial reflection. Utilizing
practical examples, Feynman examines if a mirror-image
clock would function identically to its original, leading to a
broader consideration of how physical phenomena define
“right” and “left”.
2-5 Polar and Axial Vectors

The text differentiates between polar and axial vectors and
discusses how symmetry can be applied within vector
analysis. The behavior of physical laws is explored under the
concept of reflection symmetry and how changes in
orientation affect calculations, distinguishing between polar
vectors that change in sign and axial vectors that do not.
2-6 Which Hand is Right?

Feynman poses the challenge of defining “right” and “left” to
a Martian, illustrating the complexities of establishing
directionality when symmetries in physics suggest a
uniformity that lacks explicit references to spatial definitions.
2-7 Parity is Not Conserved!

The chapter highlights a pivotal discovery in particle physics
regarding weak decay processes, leading to the realization
that certain laws—specifically the conservation of
parity—are not universally applicable. Experimental results
demonstrate that in weak interactions, asymmetry exists,
challenging previous understandings of symmetry in physical
laws.
2-8 Antimatter

Finally, the text addresses the concept of antimatter,
presenting how particles can have corresponding
antiparticles. The behaviors of matter and antimatter are
examined in the context of physical laws and their
interactions, revealing nuances in the symmetry across these
domains.
2-9 Broken Symmetries

The chapter concludes with a reflection on the idea of nearly
symmetric laws in nature, suggesting that while many
processes exhibit symmetrical behavior, some do not. This
realization prompts deeper inquiries into the fundamentals of
symmetry in physics and nature, with examples that reveal
how perfect symmetry could be perceived as unattainable or
undesirable within the broader context of physical laws.
Example
Key Point:Symmetry is fundamental to
understanding the consistent behavior of physical
laws across different situations.
Example:Imagine you're rolling a ball across a perfectly
smooth, symmetrical surface. No matter how you throw
it—whether straight, at an angle, or with a spin—the
laws of physics ensure it will always behave
predictably. This experience echoes Feynman’s key
insight: natural laws are symmetrical and conserve
certain quantities, such as momentum. Now picture
substituting the smooth surface with one that has slight
imperfections. You notice how the ball behaves
differently, illustrating that while symmetry governs
most interactions in physics, deviations can occur when
symmetry is 'broken.' This principle not only helps us
understand motion and forces better but also forms the
backbone of conservation laws that dictate how energy
and momentum transfer in our universe.
Critical Thinking
Key Point:The realization that symmetry can be
broken leads to deeper insights in physics.
Critical Interpretation:Feynman's discussion on broken
symmetries opens the door to questioning the
completeness of physical laws, as it suggests that nature
sometimes diverges from idealized symmetrical
behavior, which challenges our understanding of
fundamental principles. This perspective invites
skepticism about the absoluteness of such laws, as
real-world phenomena may not adhere strictly to
theoretical constructs, echoing opinions from physicists
like Lee and Yang, who initially proposed the idea that
parity is not conserved in weak interactions, thus urging
readers to critically assess the validity of symmetry as
an ultimate guide in physics.
Chapter 3 Summary : THE SPECIAL
THEORY OF RELATIVITY
Chapter 3: The Special Theory of Relativity
3-1 The Principle of Relativity

For over two centuries, Newton's equations governed the
understanding of motion. Einstein identified flaws in
Newton's Second Law in 1905, notably that mass increases
with velocity. This led to the corrected mass formula, which
includes a velocity-based correction factor, indicating a slight
increase in mass at ordinary speeds. While this change is
almost imperceptible under normal circumstances, it
becomes significant at velocities near the speed of light. The
chapter introduces Newton's principle of relativity,
emphasizing that laws of physics remain the same in
uniformly moving systems.
3-2 The Lorentz Transformation

The failure of Newton's laws to align with Maxwell's
equations brought the need for a transformation that
preserves their form. H. A. Lorentz proposed the Lorentz
transformation, which allows Maxwell's equations to remain
unchanged when transitioning between moving and
stationary systems. This adjustment led to a new
understanding of space and time measurements in physics.
3-3 The Michelson-Morley Experiment

The 1887 Michelson-Morley experiment aimed to detect
Earth's motion through the ether. The apparatus measured
light's speed in a moving frame. However, the experiment
yielded null results, leading to the realization that physical
laws behaved consistently despite the motion. Lorentz's
hypothesis suggested that moving bodies contract in the
direction of motion, reconciling the experiment's outcomes
with theoretical predictions.
3-4 Transformation of Time

In addition to length contraction, time measurements must
also be adjusted when considering different frames of
motion. Observers see events occur at different times due to
9:41
US Matthew
US Joanna
UK Brian
9:41
FIFTH DISCIPLINE The artand practice of
the leaning
Chapter1 of 5: Overview
heTith Discipli
Chaoter 1 of s
Preface
Since ancient times, people have been crazy for red.For example, redwas European used noble women'smakeup and kings and cardinals'robes. The popularity of re was evider vident. Throughout history, Britain is not the only country that mobilized state power to protect their secret colors
The secret to creating a bright mine was red called hidden de for for hundreds bun ofyears by Spain. Thisiscole color, as brightas a ruby,is oneof
the reddest dyesthat can be made in natu so it has long been a favorite in the painter's paint box. But where does this red come
from?
Afterthe Spanish Conquistadors set their feet
on the lands ofSouth America, theyfound
neals, awhite parasite living on cactuse
They used machines similar to a vacuum
Quotes
Scan to Download
Mind Maр
UK Emma
1.5x
ΔΟ
The deeper and clearer interpretation we provide, the better
grasp of each title you have.
Absorb knowledge even in fragmented time.
Check whether you have mastered what you just learned.
Chapter 4 Summary : RELATIVISTIC
ENERGY AND MOMENTUM
Chapter 4: Relativistic Energy and Momentum
4-1 Relativity and the Philosophers

This section explores the implications of the principle of
relativity, as proposed by Einstein and Poincaré, for our
understanding of physics and philosophy. Poincaré asserts
that the laws of physics are invariant for observers in uniform
motion, provoking philosophical debates about the meaning
of "relativity." Many philosophers misunderstand relativity,
equating it with a simplistic notion that "everything is
relative," which neglects deeper truths and predictions about
physical phenomena. In contrast, Feynman argues that
certain approaches to discussing motion, such as detecting
absolute velocity, are misguided. Historical context is
provided, highlighting that even Newtonian principles
acknowledged the relativity inherent in motion, but it was
Maxwell’s electrodynamics that illuminated the principles
governing velocity measurement.
4-2 The Twin Paradox

The famous twin paradox illustrates the consequences of
relativistic effects, where one twin, Paul, travels at high
speed and ages slower than his twin, Peter, who remains on
Earth. Despite superficial symmetry—both twins perceiving
the other's clock as running slow—the real difference arises
from Paul’s experience of acceleration during his journey,
which defines the asymmetry. The paradox emphasizes the
relevance of acceleration in comparative aging.
4-3 Transformation of Velocities

Feynman introduces the Lorentz transformation equations,
which redefine the relationships between coordinates in
relatively moving frames of reference, differing notably from
Newtonian mechanics. The section addresses the addition of
velocities, emphasizing that velocities do not simply sum
algebraically, especially in the context of light's constant
speed. This leads to the resolution of peculiar cases, such as
how speeds combine when objects are moving close to light
speed.
4-4 Relativistic Mass

The discussion of relativistic mass illustrates how mass
increases with velocity. At higher speeds, the conventional
notion of momentum (as mass times velocity) must be
adapted, reflecting that this "mass" is not a fixed value but
varies depending on speed. By analyzing collisions and their
outcomes under the conservation of momentum and energy,
Feynman arrives at a generalized formula for relativistic
mass that accounts for these variances.
4-5 Relativistic Energy

Feynman connects relativistic mass to energy, reinforcing
that energy has inertia and leading to the conclusion that
mass-energy equivalence implies all forms of energy
contribute to an object's inertia. He explains the significance
of this principle in nuclear physics, where mass lost during a
reaction transforms into energy, as exemplified in atomic
fission. The total energy equation \(E = mc^2\) reflects this
relationship, stating that an object’s total energy includes its
rest mass energy and its kinetic energy, with further
mathematical relations establishing connections between
energy, momentum, and mass.
Critical Thinking
Key Point:Relativity as a Mathematical Framework
vs. Philosophical Interpretation
Critical Interpretation:Feynman’s discussion on
relativity delves into how the mathematical
formulations, like the Lorentz transformations and the
mass-energy equivalence, provide a framework for
understanding physical phenomena. However, critics
argue that Feynman's dismissal of certain philosophical
interpretations overlooks the nuances in how people can
understand and relate to concepts like time and velocity.
While Feynman aims for clarity in physics, it is
essential to acknowledge that aspects of relativity touch
on profound philosophical implications that can deeply
influence human perspectives and cultures. Works such
as 'Philosophy of Physics' by David Wallace and
'Relativity and Modern Physics' by Robert Resnick
further elaborate on how philosophical interpretation of
relativity differs from its mathematical structure,
thereby complicating Feynman's insistence on a strictly
physical interpretation.
Chapter 5 Summary : SPACE-TIME
5 SPACE-TIME
5-1 The Geometry of Space-Time

The theory of relativity alters our understanding of space and
time relationships, highlighting the need for a deep
understanding of the Lorentz transformation, which relates
coordinates of two observers—one stationary and one
moving. The transformation reveals that measured positions
and times blend into mixtures due to the high speeds
involved, drawing a parallel between this phenomenon and
our perception of width and depth from different angles.
Feynman proposes viewing objects in a combined space-time
realm, where events occupy a "blob" in this new dimension.
5-2 Space-Time Intervals

Although space-time does not conform to traditional
Euclidean geometry, it possesses unique characteristics. A
key finding is that the interval between two space-time points
remains invariant across transformations, encapsulated in the
equation \( c^2t^2 - x^2 - y^2 - z^2 \). Measurements of time
and space should be unified in their units to simplify
equations. Feynman explains that intervals can be real or
imaginary, denoting space-like or time-like intervals,
respectively, essential for understanding the nature of light
propagation and the structure of space-time.
5-3 Past, Present, and Future

Space-time can be divided into three regions surrounding a
point: the past, present, and future. Events from the 'affective
past' can impact the present, while actions taken now can
affect the 'affective future.' Feynman emphasizes that
simultaneity is not absolute and varies based on the
observer's perspective, leading to philosophical musings on
the nature of knowledge versus observable reality.
5-4 More About Four-Vectors

Feynman introduces the concept of four-vectors as quantities
that transform similarly under motion as coordinates do
under rotation. He focuses on the four-vector momentum,
which includes the three spatial components of momentum
and energy as its time component. This framework provides
new insights into conservation laws and demonstrates the
relationship between energy and momentum across different
reference frames.
5-5 Four-Vector Algebra

The algebra of four-vectors follows unique notation where
individual components interact according to specific rules.
Feynman represents the laws of conservation of energy and
momentum within this four-dimensional format, asserting
their interdependency. He elaborates on the scalar product of
four-vectors and highlights the peculiar behavior of massless
particles like photons, which maintain energy and
momentum but possess zero rest mass. The relationship
between energy and frequency in light emphasizes the
continuous nature of space-time, as encapsulated in
Minkowski's vision of integrated space and time.
Chapter 6 Summary : CURVED SPACE
6 CURVED SPACE
6-1 Curved Spaces with Two Dimensions

Newton's laws of gravitation describe attraction between
masses, but Einstein proposed a different interpretation:
space and time are curved near massive objects. To simplify
the complex ideas of curved space-time, the discussion
begins with curved space in two dimensions. To illustrate
this, we visualize bugs living on different surfaces: a plane, a
sphere, and a "hot plate" where distance is affected by
temperature. These bugs can only perceive their own surfaces
and will develop their own geometries based on the space
they inhabit, leading to unique geometric properties and
deviations from Euclidean norms.
6-2 Curvature in Three-Dimensional Space

In three dimensions, curvature is more complex than in two.
The space can vary in curvature; triangles and circles can
yield different geometrical results based on their orientation.
The average curvature helps understand the space's overall
shape, but six curvature components define it more
completely.
6-3 Our Space is Curved

Geometric measurements can indicate whether space is
curved. Einstein's theory asserts that space is curved due to
the presence of matter, and this curvature affects how we
measure sizes and shapes in context to gravity. Observations
and calculations of celestial bodies seek to determine the
overall curvature of our universe.
6-4 Geometry in Space-Time

Space and time are interlinked, so changes in gravitational
fields will also change how we perceive time. The straightest
path through space-time, akin to a straight line in physical
space, requires uniform motion to maximize the proper time
on a clock.
6-5 Gravity and the Principle of Equivalence

App Store
Editors' Choice
Scan to Download
22k 5 star review
Positive feedback
Sara Scholz
tes after each book summary
erstanding but also make the
and engaging. Bookey has
ding for me.
Fantastic!!!
★★★★★
Masood El Toure FiI'm amazed by the variety of books and languages
Bookey supports. It's not just an app, it's a gateway
to global knowledge. Plus, earning points for charity
is a big plus!
AEbatom
José Botín
ding habit
O's design
ual growth
Love it!
★★★★ Wonnie Tappkx
Bookey offers me time to go through the
important parts of a book. It also gives me enough
idea whether or not I should purchase the whole
book version or not! It is easy to use!
Time saver!
★★★★★
Bookey is my go-to app forsummaries are concise, inscurated. It's like having acoright at my fingertips!
Awesome app!
★★
Rahul Malviya
I love audiobooks but don't always have time to listen
to the entire book! bookey allows me to get a summary
of the highlights of the book I'm interested in!!! What a
great concept !!!highly recommended!
Beautiful App Alex WallThis app is a lifesaver for book lovers withbusy schedules. The summaries are spot
on, and the mind maps help reinforce whI've learned. Highly recommend!
Best Quotes from Six Not-So-Easy Pieces
by Richard P. Feynman with Page
Numbers
View on Bookey Website and Generate Beautiful Quote Images
Chapter 1 | Quotes From Pages 53-97
1.A thing is symmetrical if one can subject it to a
certain operation and it appears exactly the same
after the operation.
2.Will one machine behave exactly the same as the other?
Will it follow all the motions in exact parallelism?
3.if we do not go inside a wall, if we know the origin of the
outside forces, and arrange that those are moved too, then
the machinery will work the same in one location as in
another.
4.there is no unique way to define the origin of the world,
because the laws will appear the same, from whatever
position they are observed.
5.the laws of physics are symmetrical for translational
displacements, symmetrical in the sense that the laws do
not change when we make a translation of our coordinates.
6.the two properties which we call invariance (or symmetry)
under translation of axes and rotation of axes.
7.it is clear that there are other kinds of equations which are
true for any two coordinate systems.
8.we wish to verify is that x² + y² + z² = x'² + y'² + z'². It
had better be—and if we substitute Eq. (1.5) we do indeed
find that it is.
9.Are there any cases in physics where we need it? Yes, we
need it all the time.
10.thus we can always represent forces by lines, which is
very convenient, because once we have drawn the line we
no longer need the axes.
Chapter 2 | Quotes From Pages 98-145
1.In the first place, symmetry is fascinating to the
human mind, and everyone likes objects or
patterns that are in some way symmetrical.
2.What we can do to physical phenomena, or to a physical
situation in an experiment, and yet leave the result the
same.
3.The laws of physics appear the same.
4.For a reason which we cannot make clear at the level of the
present discussion—a fact that most physicists still find
somewhat staggering, a most profound and beautiful thing,
is that, in quantum mechanics, for each of the rules of
symmetry there is a corresponding conservation law.
5.It clearly seems not impossible, not against the physical
laws, to have a sphere like the earth with 'left-handed dirt'
on it and a person like ourselves...
6.It is presumed that the phenomena in the case of life do not
show a lack of symmetry in physical laws, but do show...
the universal nature and the commonness of ultimate origin
of all creatures on earth, in the sense described above.
Chapter 3 | Quotes From Pages 146-193
1.The motions of bodies included in a given space
are the same among themselves, whether that
space is at rest or moves uniformly forward in a
straight line.
2....it was remarkable that it was discovered theoretically
before it was discovered experimentally.
3.The apparent time between clicks is longer for the moving
clock, in the same proportion as shown in the hypotenuse
of the triangle...
4.a complete conspiracy is itself a law of nature!
5.the mass of a body can be expressed more simply than by
the formula (3.1), if we say that the mass is equal to the
total energy content divided by c².
6.the utility of the principle of relativity—it permits us to
make predictions, even about things that otherwise we do
not know much about.
7.If the equations of physics are to be consistent with one
another, we must replace the old transformation between
the coordinates and time with a new one...
Scan to Download
Download Bookey App to enjoy
1 Million+ Quotes
1000+ Book Summaries
Free Trial Available!
Download on the
App Store
GET IT ON
Google Play
10:17
<
Goals are good for
setting a direction,
but systems are best
for making progress.
-Atomic Habits
0
88 Categories
10:17 10:17
X Theme
Categories Nature
All ר Saved Π
54
Bookey See all
Personal
Development
Management
& Business
Sky
Psychology
& Happiness
Fiction
Classics
Personal Development See all
Life Success
Abstract
Π Relationship Friendship
Psychology & Happiness See all
Chapter 4 | Quotes From Pages 194-237
1.According to the principle of relativity, the laws of
physical phenomena must be the same for a fixed
observer as for an observer who has a uniform
motion of translation relative to him, so that we
have not, nor can we possibly have, any means of
discerning whether or not we are carried along in
such a motion.
2.But it has just dawned on them that it is impossible to tell
how fast one is moving without looking outside; the
physicists are rather stupid for having thought otherwise.
3.If we limit ourselves to influences in the sense of what kind
of new ideas and suggestions are made to the physicist by
the principle of relativity, we could describe some of them
as follows.
4.The only relevant question is whether the ideas are
consistent with what is found experimentally.
5.Finally, there is even a philosophy which says that one
cannot detect any motion except by looking outside.
Chapter 5 | Quotes From Pages 238-277
1.Space of itself, and time of itself will sink into mere
shadows, and only a kind of union between them
shall survive.
2.A difference between a space measurement and a time
measurement produces a new space measurement.
3.Our brain does not immediately recalculate coordinates and
time when we move at high speed... we understand now,
we would see some of the other man’s time—we would see
‘behind,’ so to speak, a little bit.
4.In other words, if we could, we would understand that time
and space are also of the same nature.
5.The ‘reality’ of an object that we are looking at is somehow
greater... than its ‘width’ and its ‘depth.’
Chapter 6 | Quotes From Pages 278-322
1.Einstein said that space is curved and that matter
is the source of the curvature.
2.We define a curved space to be a space in which the
geometry is not what we expect for a plane.
3.With that in mind let’s see what the rest of their geometries
look like.
4.If you assume that the length of the rulers... goes in
proportion to one plus some constant times the square of
the distance away from the origin, then you will find that
the geometry of that hot plate is exactly the same in all
details as the geometry of the sphere.
5.Objects always move from one place to another so that a
clock carried on it gives a longer time than it would on any
other possible trajectory.
Scan to Download
Download Bookey App to enjoy
1 Million+ Quotes
1000+ Book Summaries
Free Trial Available!
Download on the
App Store
GET IT ON
Google Play
10:17
<
Goals are good for
setting a direction,
but systems are best
for making progress.
-Atomic Habits
0
88 Categories
10:17 10:17
X Theme
Categories Nature
All ר Saved Π
54
Bookey See all
Personal
Development
Management
& Business
Sky
Psychology
& Happiness
Fiction
Classics
Personal Development See all
Life Success
Abstract
Π Relationship Friendship
Psychology & Happiness See all
Six Not-So-Easy Pieces Questions
View on Bookey Website
Chapter 1 | VECTORS| Q&A
1.Question
What does Feynman mean by symmetry in physical law?
Answer:Symmetry in physical law refers to the idea
that certain physical systems remain invariant or
unchanged under specific transformations or
operations. This means that if you apply a symmetry
operation, like translating or rotating a system, the
laws governing that system should still hold true.
2.Question
How does the concept of symmetry apply to physical laws
and machinery?
Answer:Feynman illustrates that if two identical machines
are set up in different locations and started under identical
conditions, they should behave the same, provided all
relevant external influences are accounted for. If they don't
behave the same, it suggests some relevant factor hasn't been
considered.
3.Question
What is the significance of defining the origin in relation
to physical laws?
Answer:There is no unique origin in physical measurements;
multiple origins can be used to describe the same system.
The laws of physics remain valid regardless of where the
origin is placed, demonstrating the fundamental symmetry of
those laws.
4.Question
How do rotational symmetries affect mechanical systems
like pendulum clocks?
Answer:Rotational symmetry indicates that if a clock is
tilted, its operation may change due to external factors like
gravity, emphasizing that some influences need to be
accounted for to observe the same behavior in different
orientations.
5.Question
What are vectors and why are they useful in physics?
Answer:Vectors are quantities that have both magnitude and
direction, such as force, velocity, and momentum. They are
crucial in physics because many physical laws and equations
can be expressed in vector form, which simplifies analysis
and calculations.
6.Question
What is the scalar product of two vectors and why is it
important?
Answer:The scalar product, or dot product, of two vectors is
a scalar quantity derived from multiplying their magnitudes
and the cosine of the angle between them. It is significant
because it helps compute quantities like work done and
kinetic energy, which do not have direction.
7.Question
Can you provide an example of how we apply symmetry
in real-world situations?
Answer:An example is the law of conservation of
momentum, where the momentum before and after a
collision remains constant, regardless of where or how you
measure it, demonstrating the translational symmetry of
momentum.
8.Question
What does Feynman mean by the statement 'if we do not
go inside a wall'?
Answer:This highlights the principle that for symmetry to be
valid, all relevant influencing factors must be considered
while moving systems around. If part of the system
encounters an unaccounted-for external influence like a wall,
the expected symmetrical behavior may not manifest.
9.Question
What are the implications of saying 'the laws will appear
the same' from different positions of observation?
Answer:This implies that physical laws are universal; they
are not dependent on specific points of observation. This
universality is a cornerstone of scientific understanding,
allowing for consistent predictions no matter where an
experiment is conducted.
10.Question
How does Feynman differentiate between scalars and
vectors in physics?
Answer:Feynman distinguishes scalars as quantities that have
magnitude only (like temperature), while vectors possess
both magnitude and direction (like velocity). This distinction
is crucial for understanding how different types of physical
quantities behave and interact.
Chapter 2 | SYMMETRY IN PHYSICAL LAWS|
Q&A
1.Question
What is the importance of symmetry in physical laws as
discussed in this chapter?
Answer:Symmetry is vital in physics as it reveals
foundational principles governing natural
phenomena. It provides a framework to understand
various physical laws, illustrating how different
scenarios yield the same results despite changes in
configurations or coordinates. Symmetry operations
such as translations in space and time, rotations, and
reflections underlie conservation laws, showcasing
the inherent order of the universe.
2.Question
How does symmetry relate to conservation laws in
quantum mechanics?
Answer:In quantum mechanics, there exists a profound
connection between symmetries and conservation laws. For
example, symmetry under translations in space relates to the
conservation of momentum, and symmetry under time
translation is linked to energy conservation. Each discovered
symmetry corresponds to a conservation law, highlighting
the elegant structure of physical laws.
3.Question
Can you provide an example of a symmetry that does not
hold true under certain conditions?
Answer:An example is the symmetry associated with time
reversibility. While the fundamental laws of physics on a
microscopic level appear reversible, macroscopic phenomena
like an egg cracking are irreversible. This discrepancy
highlights that even though the laws might suggest
symmetry, practical, observable events demonstrate a lack of
time symmetry on a larger scale.
4.Question
What role does reflection symmetry play in defining
concepts like 'right' and 'left'?
Answer:Reflection symmetry suggests that if physical laws
are symmetric, then distinguishing 'right' from 'left' should
theoretically be impossible. However, in practice, we can
define right and left based on physical phenomena, such as
the rotation of polarized light. The existence of biological
and chemical asymmetries complicates this ideal symmetry,
indicating that environmental factors influence our
perception of directionality.
5.Question
What significance does the discovery of parity violation
hold in contemporary physics?
Answer:The discovery that parity is not conserved in weak
interactions marked a groundbreaking shift in physics,
suggesting that not all symmetries in nature are perfect. This
realization has profound implications for our understanding
of fundamental forces, leading to new theories in particle
physics, and emphasizes that nature can exhibit asymmetries
despite the apparent symmetries present in other forces like
electromagnetism.
6.Question
How does Feynman use the analogy of a Martian to
illustrate the challenge of defining physical concepts
without visual reference?
Answer:Feynman uses the analogy of communicating with a
Martian to highlight the difficulty of defining concepts like
'right' and 'left' without visual cues. This scenario emphasizes
the limits of language and measures based solely on
geographical positions and suggests that physical
phenomena, rather than visual or conventional definitions,
underpin the understanding of spatial relationships and
symmetry.
7.Question
What overarching philosophical question does Feynman
raise about the nature of symmetry in physics?
Answer:Feynman philosophically questions why nature
exhibits near symmetry but not complete symmetry. He
ponders whether the inherent imperfections present in the
universe's laws prevent us from attaining a sense of
perfection, implying that the 'imperfections' in symmetries
serve a purpose in the grand scheme of understanding the
universe.
Chapter 3 | THE SPECIAL THEORY OF
RELATIVITY| Q&A
1.Question
What did Einstein discover that changed our
understanding of mass and motion?
Answer:Einstein discovered that mass is not a
constant. He demonstrated that mass increases with
velocity, which is a fundamental departure from
Newton's laws of motion. Specifically, he formulated
the equation m = m €/"(1 - v²/c²), indicating that as
an object approaches the speedass
increases, making it harder to accelerate further.
2.Question
How does the principle of relativity affect the laws of
physics inside a moving spaceship?
Answer:The principle of relativity asserts that the laws of
physics must remain the same in any uniformly moving
reference frame. This means that experiments conducted
inside a moving spaceship will yield the same results as if
they were conducted in a stationary frame, provided that we
do not observe the outside world. For example, if someone
inside a spaceship performs mechanical experiments, they
will see the same results as someone who is stationary on the
ground.
3.Question
Explain the significance of the Michelson-Morley
experiment in the context of the ether theory.
Answer:The Michelson-Morley experiment aimed to detect
the presence of 'ether,' a medium supposed to carry light
waves. The experiment failed to detect any difference in the
speed of light relative to the motion of the Earth through
ether. This surprising null result contradicted the ether theory
and hinted that light's speed is constant, leading to the
realization that classical physics needed reformulation under
relativistic principles.
4.Question
What is the Lorentz transformation and why is it crucial
to the theory of relativity?
Answer:The Lorentz transformation connects the coordinates
of two observers in relative motion. It alters the traditional
concepts of space and time, showing that they are
intertwined. This transformation preserves the form of
physical laws across different inertial frames, enabling a
consistent application of physics under relativistic
conditions. It reveals that time and length are not absolute,
leading to implications like time dilation and length
contraction.
5.Question
How does moving at high speeds affect the perception of
time and length according to relativity?
Answer:In relativity, time dilation means that a moving clock
ticks slower compared to a stationary observer's clock, while
length contraction means that objects in motion are measured
to be shorter along the direction of motion. For example, if a
person travels in a spaceship near the speed of light, they will
age slower relative to someone remaining on Earth, and their
spaceship will appear compressed in the direction of travel to
an outside observer.
6.Question
What is the relationship between mass and energy as
suggested by Einstein?
Answer:Einstein proposed the famous equation E=mc²,
indicating that mass (m) and energy (E) are interchangeable.
This means that a body's mass is a measure of its energy
content. As energy increases (e.g., from kinetic energy or
converting mass in nuclear reactions), the mass also
increases, illustrating the deep connection between mass and
energy.
7.Question
What conclusions can we draw from the behavior of
particles like muons in relation to relativity?
Answer:Muons are unstable particles with a very short
lifetime. When they travel close to the speed of light, their
observed lifespan increases significantly due to time dilation.
Although their intrinsic lifetime is mere microseconds, they
are detected much farther from their point of origin than
expected, reinforcing the concept that moving clocks
(muons) tick slower compared to stationary observers,
aligning with Einstein's theory of relativity.
8.Question
Why is the concept of simultaneity important in the
context of relativity?
Answer:Simultaneity in relativity is non-absolute; events that
appear simultaneous from one frame of reference may not be
simultaneous from another due to relative motion. This leads
to the realization that observations of time are dependent on
the observer's state of motion, affecting how people
synchronize clocks and understand causality in different
frames.
9.Question
How did Einstein's work change the conservation laws in
physics?
Answer:Einstein modified the concept of momentum in the
realm of high velocities by introducing the relativistic
momentum p = mv/"(1 - v²/c²). This changes how we think
about forces and intera that
conservation laws hold true even under conditions where
classical mechanics would break down, thus preserving the
fundamental principles of physics in relativistic contexts.
10.Question
What did the failure to detect ether drift imply for the
framework of classical physics?
Answer:The failure to detect ether drift meant that the
classical framework of physics, which relied on absolute
reference frames, was inadequate. It suggested that light
travels at a constant speed regardless of the observer's
motion, leading to the rejection of the ether concept and the
acceptance of the principles of relativity, where observations
are tied to relative speeds rather than absolute velocities.
Scienca
Seience
Scan to Download
Read, Share, Empower
Finish Your Reading Challenge, Donate Books to African Children.
The Concept
BOOKS FOR AFRICA X
This book donation activity is rolling out together with Books For Africа.
We release this project because we share the same belief as BFA: For many
children in Africa, the gift of books truly is a gift of hopе.
The Rule
Earn 100 points Redeem a book Donate to Africa
Your learning not only brings knowledge but also allows you to earn points for
charitable causes! For every 100 points you earn, a book will be donated to Africa.
Chapter 4 | RELATIVISTIC ENERGY AND
MOMENTUM| Q&A
1.Question
What fundamental philosophical shift does Einstein's
theory of relativity represent regarding motion and
reference frames?
Answer:Einstein's theory challenges the notion of
absolute motion by asserting that the laws of physics
are the same in all inertial frames of reference. This
fundamentally suggests that motion is only
measurable relative to another object, leading to the
conclusion that we cannot discern absolute motion
without an external reference.
2.Question
How does the principle of relativity influence our
understanding of physical laws and observations?
Answer:The principle of relativity implies that even
well-established physical laws, such as Newton's laws, can
be reconsidered when new evidence or theories, like those
introduced by Einstein, show that they only hold within
certain limits of velocity. This prompts a more humble
perspective that recognizes the potential for revision in our
understanding of physics.
3.Question
What is the significance of the 'twin paradox' in
relativity, and what does it illustrate about time and
aging?
Answer:The twin paradox illustrates that time is not absolute;
it demonstrates that when one twin travels at high speeds into
space and returns, they age less than their twin who remained
stationary on Earth. This outcome challenges the classical
notion of simultaneity and highlights how time dilation
occurs due to high velocity.
4.Question
In what way does relativity change our approach to
defining energy and mass?
Answer:Relativity reveals that mass increases with velocity
and that energy is intrinsically linked to mass. The famous
equation E=mc² reflects this relationship, showing that
energy has mass and mass has energy, fundamentally altering
our understanding of mass-energy equivalence.
5.Question
What philosophical implications arise from the concept of
detecting motion and velocity in relativity?
Answer:The inability to measure absolute velocity without a
reference object leads to philosophical discussions about the
nature of reality and perception. It raises questions about
what constitutes measurable and objective truths in physics
versus subjective perspectives.
6.Question
How do the Lorentz transformations redefine the
addition of velocities in relativistic contexts?
Answer:Lorentz transformations introduce a new formula for
combining velocities that avoids exceeding the speed of
light, allowing us to see that velocities do not simply add
algebraically, but are corrected by factors depending on their
relative speeds.
7.Question
What does Feynman mean by stating that 'energy has
inertia'?
Answer:Feynman explains that as energy is added to a
system (e.g., kinetic energy in colliding objects), the
effective mass of the system also increases. This means when
energy is present, it contributes to the mass, thereby
exhibiting inertia, which is a direct implication of
mass-energy equivalence.
8.Question
How does the concept of 'rest mass' differ from
'relativistic mass' in the context of relativity?
Answer:Rest mass refers to the mass of an object measured
when it is at rest relative to an observer, while relativistic
mass refers to the mass that an object appears to have when it
is moving relative to an observer at high velocities.
Relativistic mass increases as an object approaches the speed
of light.
9.Question
What is the connection between relativity and the
conservation of momentum and energy?
Answer:In relativity, momentum and energy conservation
principles adapt to account for the effects of high velocities,
leading to equations that relate energy, momentum, and
mass. The conservation laws must hold across all reference
frames, influencing the outcomes of collisions and
interactions at relativistic speeds.
Chapter 5 | SPACE-TIME| Q&A
1.Question
How does the theory of relativity change our intuitive
understanding of space and time?
Answer:The theory of relativity introduces the
concept that space and time are intertwined in a
mathematical framework known as space-time. It
demonstrates that measurements of space and time
can vary for different observers, depending on their
relative motion. This challenges our intuitive notion
of absolute space and time, showing instead that
they are relative and interconnected.
2.Question
What is the significance of the Lorentz transformation?
Answer:The Lorentz transformation is crucial because it
mathematically describes how the coordinates of an event in
space and time change for observers moving relative to one
another. It allows us to relate the measurements made by
stationary observers and those in motion, capturing the
relativistic effects that come into play at high speeds.
3.Question
Can you explain the analogy made between measured
dimensions like width and depth, and space and time?
Answer:The analogy illustrates that just as width and depth
can vary depending on our perspective and angle of
observation, so can space and time be viewed differently
based on the observer's motion. The 'true' nature of these
dimensions might be more complex than how we typically
observe them, emphasizing that what we measure is not
always definitive but subject to perspective.
4.Question
What is a space-time interval, and why is it important?
Answer:A space-time interval is a quantity defined as the
difference between the temporal and spatial coordinates of
two events (c²t² - x² - y² - z²). It remains constant across
different frames of reference and is a fundamental aspect of
the geometry of space-time. This invariance allows physicists
to describe the relationship between time and space in a
consistent way across various contexts.
5.Question
How are the concepts of past, present, and future
structured in the context of space-time?
Answer:In the framework of space-time, events can be
categorized into regions: the 'affective past' (events that can
influence a present event), the 'affective future' (events that
can be influenced by a present event), and space-like regions,
which cannot affect each other due to the speed of light limit.
This structure challenges our understanding of simultaneity
and the notion of 'now' being uniformly defined.
6.Question
What is meant by a four-vector, and how does it relate to
energy and momentum?
Answer:A four-vector is a mathematical object that combines
energy and momentum into a single entity in space-time.
Specifically, it includes energy as one component and the
three spatial momentum components. This unification
enables more straightforward transformations between
reference frames, preserving the structure of physical laws
under the principles of relativity.
7.Question
Why is the statement that 'time and space are equivalent'
significant in relativity?
Answer:This statement reflects the idea that time can be
treated as another dimension similar to those of space,
leading to profound implications for how we understand
motion and causality in the universe. It highlights that time
can stretch and contract, just like spatial dimensions,
fundamentally altering how we conceive of events and their
relationships.
8.Question
How does the nature of light as a massless particle
influence relativistic physics?
Answer:Light travels at the speed of light c and is described
by special relationships of energy and momentum, leading to
unique properties like the Doppler effect. Its masslessness
implies that it doesn't experience time or rest in the usual
sense, reinforcing the ideas that challenge our classical
understanding of motion and energy.
9.Question
What philosophical implications arise from Minkowski's
quote about the nature of space and time?
Answer:Minkowski's assertion suggests a transformative
view of reality where traditional concepts of space and time
become secondary to their interwoven nature. It invites us to
rethink our perceptions of reality, leading to deeper questions
about existence, observation, and the interconnectedness of
physical phenomena.
Chapter 6 | CURVED SPACE| Q&A
1.Question
What is the fundamental difference between Newton's
and Einstein's interpretation of gravity?
Answer:Newton's interpretation states that gravity
is a force that acts at a distance, inversely
proportional to the square of the distance. In
contrast, Einstein posits that gravity is a result of the
curvature of space-time caused by mass, and objects
move along 'straight lines' in this curved space-time.
2.Question
How can the concept of curved space be explained
through the analogy of bugs living on different surfaces?
Answer:Bugs representing beings in two-dimensional space
can only perceive their world based on their immediate
surroundings. A bug on a flat plane would recognize straight
lines as the shortest distance between two points, while a bug
on a sphere would perceive arcs of great circles as straight
lines. This highlights how perspective affects their
understanding of geometry, and likewise, our perception of
three-dimensional space is limited.
3.Question
What geometric principles can indicate that you are in a
curved space?
Answer:In curved spaces such as a sphere or a hot plate,
usual geometric rules fail. For instance, the angles of a
triangle can exceed or be less than 180 degrees, and the
circumference of circles does not adhere strictly to the
formula C=2Àr. These discrepancies reveal that the geometry
of the space is not n's principle of equivalence, and what does
it imply for objects in gravitational fields?
Answer:Einstein's principle of equivalence states that the
effects of gravity are indistinguishable from the effects of
acceleration. If an object is in free fall, it experiences
weightlessness. This means that gravitational and inertial
mass are equivalent, thereby linking gravity with acceleration
in a way that affects how objects behave and are perceived
within a gravitational field.
5.Question
What can we learn about the curvature of space-time
from the behavior of clocks in different gravitational
fields?
Answer:Clocks at varying heights in a gravitational field will
tick at different rates, with those in a stronger gravitational
field ticking slower than those at a higher elevation. This
demonstrates that time itself is affected by gravity and can
vary spatially, indicating that space-time is indeed curved in
the presence of mass.
6.Question
How does Einstein's theory of gravity unify concepts from
geometry and physics?
Answer:Einstein's theory describes gravity not just as a force
but as a geometric property of space-time, where massive
objects cause a curvature that influences how objects move.
This leads to a unified understanding of gravity through
geometric principles, where objects follow paths (geodesics)
that maximize their proper time, akin to minimizing distance
in classical geometry.
7.Question
What implications does the notion of space-time
curvature have on our understanding of the universe's
shape?
Answer:Understanding space-time curvature prompts
questions about the overall shape of the universe.
Measurements of galaxies and cosmic structures aim to
determine if the universe is flat, closed, or open, reflecting
the balance of gravitational forces and mass-energy
distributions throughout large scales.
Free Picks
5-me
New
Today's Bookey
T YOU DO HO YOU ARE
You
17:27
P Prachi Gaur donate 7 book
Rya dorate
12/100>
Get enough points to donate a book
Atomic Habits Four steps to build good habits and break bad ones
es Cloa
36 mn3 key insightsFinished Get Points Donors List
Description
Chapter 1 of 5
Overview
Hi,welcome to Bookey. Today we'll unlock the book Atomic Habits: & Proven An Easy Way to Build Good Habits Break Bad Ones. &
Imagine you're sitting in a plane, from Los flying Angeles
to a mysterious to New York City. Due and undetectable turbulence, your aircraft's nose shifts more than 7 feet, 3.5 degrees to the south. After five hours of flying, before you know it, the plane is landing.
Never GSchwarzman's relentiess
funds for Blackstone's firsovercoming numerous rejethe importance of persisteentrepreneurship. After twosuccessfully raised $850 mAnticancer
Finish a Bookey today
0+2
Achieve today's daily goal
02
Why do so many of us flil to lose weight? Whycan't
we go to bed earlyand wake
of a lack
wake up early? ey'? Isit I i because of determination? ermination?
weare doing Not at all.The thing is, because we haven't it the wrong way. way. Moreore specifically,it's specificall,t's built an effective behavioral
6 Listen Read
17:53
Hannah
Daily Goals
17:251
Library
nterpretation
System Noto Sans Cormorant Garar
17:46
Q
17:26 < Learning Paths <
Bookeys IdeaClips Notes Quotes Ongoing
Saved
is first
makes for me. How the me feel, it's like .It has to match my life. shappening around e. That's me where it comes from.
-Boots Riley 1 day stre
Time of Use
6183
Badges
2
of a 13-mun gl
Best score:2
Finished
102
C
Downloaded
Finished
History
14/08/2024
eyer Eat Ace
See all
Human Compatible
1/7 Bookeys
Develop leadership skills
1/7 Bookeys
Master time ma.
Π
Top 10 of the m
OYTO TALK
01 How to talk to any02 Atomic Habits
3/6 B
your writing The 5 AM Cь
arted Aorc)
2
World' bestideas
unlock your potential
Download on the
App Store
GET IT ON
Google Play
Scan to download
Check the Correct Answer on Bookey Website
1.Symmetry in physical laws means a system
appears the same after an operation, such as
rotation or translation.
2.The position of the origin in a coordinate system affects the
laws of physics, making them different for various
observers.
3.Vectors are quantities that have direction and magnitude,
such as speed and distance.
Chapter 2 | SYMMETRY IN PHYSICAL LAWS|
1.Symmetry operations are defined as
transformations that alter the outcomes of
physical systems.
2.The conservation of momentum is linked to spatial
translation symmetry in quantum mechanics.
3.The parity of all physical laws is conserved uniformly
across all types of interactions.
Chapter 3 | THE SPECIAL THEORY OF
1.Einstein identified that mass increases with
velocity, leading to a new mass formula that
includes a velocity-based correction factor.
2.The Lorentz transformation was proposed by James Clerk
Maxwell to reconcile Newton's laws with
electromagnetism.
3.The Michelson-Morley experiment produced results that
confirmed the existence of ether through which Earth
moves.
Scan to Download
Download Bookey App to enjoy
1000+ Book Summaries
Free Trial Available!
Download on the
App Store
GET IT ON
Google Play
10:16
<
10:16
X 1 of 5
Atomic Habits
Four steps to build good habits and break
bad ones
Habit building requires four steps:
cue, craving, response, and reward
are the pillars of every habit.
 James Clear
36 min 3 key insights Finished
Description
Why do so many of us fail to lose weight? Why can't
we go to bed early and wake up early? Is it because
of a lack of determination? Not at all. The thing is,
ve are doing it the wrong way. More specifically,it's
because we haven't built an effective behavioral
dst
Listen Read
10:16
5 of 5
The Two-Minute Rule is a quick
way to end procrastination, but it
only works for two minutes and
does little to build long-term
habits.
False
Correct Answer
Once you've learned to care for the seed of every habit, the
first two minutes are just the initiation of formal matters.
Over time, you'll forget the two-minute time limit and get
better at building the habit.
False True
Continue
Chapter 4 | RELATIVISTIC ENERGY AND
1.The principle of relativity states that the laws of
physics are invariant for observers in uniform
motion according to Poincaré. Is this statement
true or false?
2.The twin paradox shows that both twins age at the same
rate during Paul’s journey in high-speed travel. Is this
statement true or false?
3.According to the Lorentz transformation equations,
velocities combine simply under addition like in
Newtonian mechanics. Is this statement true or false?
1.The Lorentz transformation is essential for
understanding the relationship between the
coordinates of a stationary observer and a moving
observer in the theory of relativity.
2.In space-time, intervals can only be real numbers, and
imaginary intervals are not useful for understanding the
nature of light propagation.
3.The concept of four-vectors allows for the transformation
of quantities in motion, similar to how coordinates
transform under rotation.
1.Einstein's theory of gravitation is based on the
curvature of space-time induced by mass.
2.Clocks at lower altitudes run faster than those at higher
altitudes in a gravitational field.
3.The path of an object in a gravitational field that maximizes
the elapsed time is straight.
Scan to Download
Download Bookey App to enjoy
1000+ Book Summaries
Free Trial Available!
Download on the
App Store
GET IT ON
Google Play
10:16
<
10:16
X 1 of 5
Atomic Habits
Four steps to build good habits and break
bad ones
Habit building requires four steps:
cue, craving, response, and reward
are the pillars of every habit.
 James Clear
36 min 3 key insights Finished
Description
Why do so many of us fail to lose weight? Why can't
we go to bed early and wake up early? Is it because
of a lack of determination? Not at all. The thing is,
ve are doing it the wrong way. More specifically,it's
because we haven't built an effective behavioral
dst
Listen Read
10:16
5 of 5
The Two-Minute Rule is a quick
way to end procrastination, but it
only works for two minutes and
does little to build long-term
habits.
False
Correct Answer
Once you've learned to care for the seed of every habit, the
first two minutes are just the initiation of formal matters.
Over time, you'll forget the two-minute time limit and get
better at building the habit.
False True
Continue