---
title: It's as Simple as One, Two, Three
author: Richard P. Feynman
year: 1985
source_type: book 
topic: [physics education, personal]
source_url: http://calteches.library.caltech.edu/607/2/Feynman.pdf
---
It's as Simple as One, Two, Three. • •
. by Richard P. Feynman
as told to Ralph Leighton
Richard Feynman, Nobel laureate and the Richard
Chace Tolman Professor of Theoretical Physics, was
a bestselling author as well. When he died last
February 15, the sequel to the 1985 "Surely
You're Joking, ¥r. Feynman," Advenrures of a
Curious Character was already finished. Entitled
"What Do You Care What Other People
Think?" Further Advenrures of a Curious Character, the book recounts more Feynman tales,
including this one, as told to his friend and drumming colleague, Ralph Leighton. The book, which
also contains an account of Feynman's service on
the Challenger commission (expanded somewhat
over the article that appeared in E&S Fall 1987)
will be available at the end of this month.
Feynman's curiosity also extended to drawing.
He was a persistent artist, according to Leighton.
"He was always amazed by the fact that a good
drawing seemed to come out randomly, " said
Leighton. "Since he could never predict when a
good drawing would appear, he drew a lot." The
drawings that accompany this article also appear
in the book and were part of a collection exhibited
at Caltech last March at the time of Feynman's
memorial service.
Copyright © 1988 by Ralph Leighton and
Gweneth Feynman. Excerpted from "What Do
You Care What Other People Think?" by
Richard Feynman, as told to Ralph Leighton.
Reprinted with permission of the publisher, W. W.
Norton & Company.
When I was a kid growing up in Far Rockaway, I had a friend named Bernie Walker. We
both had "labs" at home, and we would do various "experiments." One time, we were discussing something-we must have been 11 or 12 at
the time-and I said, "But thinking is nothing
but talking to yourself inside."
"Oh yeah?" Bernie said. "Do you know the .
crazy shape of the crankshaft in a car?"
"Yeah, what of it?"
"Good. Now tell me: how did you describe
it when you were talking to yourself?"
So I learned from Bernie that thoughts can
be visual as well as verbal.
Later on, in college, I became interested in
dreams. I wondered how things could look so
real, just as if light were hitting the retina of the
eye, while the eyes are closed. Are the nerve
cells on the retina acrually being stimulated in
some other way-by the brain itself perhapsor does the brain have a "judgment depattment"
that gets slopped up during dreaming? I never
got satisfactory answers to such questions from
psychology, even though I became very interested
in how the brain works. Instead, there was all
this business about interpreting dreams, and
so on.
When I was in graduate school at Princeton
a kind of dumb psychology paper came out that
stirred up a lot of discussion. The author had
decided that the thing controlling the "time
sense" in the brain is a chemical reaction involving iron. I thought to myself, "Now, how the
hell could he figure that?"
Well, the way he did it was, his wife had
Engineering & Science/Fall 1988 11
12 Engineering & Science/Fall 1988
But it was an
interesting question: what does
determine the
• time sense'?
When you're
trying to count
at an even rate,
what does that
rate depend on?
And what could
you do to yourself to change
it?
a chronic fever which went up and down a lot.
Somehow he got the idea to test her sense of
time. He had her count seconds to herself
(without looking at a clock), and checked how
long it took her to cOunt up to 60. He had her
counting-the poor woman-all during the day;
when her fever went up, he found she counted
quicker; when her fever went down, she counted
slower. Therefore, he thought, the thing that
governed the • time sense" in the brain must be
running faster when she's got fever than when
she hasn't got fever.
Being a very 'scientific" guy, the psychologist
knew that the rate of a chemical reaction varies
with the surrounding temperature by a certain
formula that depends on the energy of the reaction. He measured the differences in speed of
his wife's counting, and determined how much
the temperature changed the speed. Then he
tried to find a chemical reaction whose rates
varied with temperature in the same amounts
as his wife's counting did. He found that iron
reactions fit the pattern best. So he deduced that
his wife's sense of time was governed by a chemical reaction in her body involving iron.
Well, it all seemed like a lot of baloney to
me-there were so many things that could go
wrong in his long chain of reasoning. But it was
an interesting question: what does determine the
"time sense"? When you're trying to count at an
even rate, what does that rate depend on? And
what could you do to yourself to change it?
I decided to investigate. I started by counting seconds-without looking at a clock, of
course~up to 60 in a slow, steady rhythm:
1, 2, 3, 4, 5 .... When I got to 60, only 48
seconds had gone by, but that didn't bother me;
the problem was not to count for exactly one
minute, but to count at a standard rate. The
next time I counted to 60, 49 seconds had
passed. The next time, 48. Then 47, 48, 49,
48, 48 .... So I found I could count at a pretry
standard rate.
Now, if I just sat there, without counting,
and waited until I thought a minute had gone
by, it was very irregular-complete variations.
So I found it's very poor to estimate a minute
by sheer guessing. But by coUnting, I could
get very accurate.
Now that I knew I could count at a standard
rate, the next question was-what affects the
rate?
Maybe it has something to do with the heart
rate. So I began to run up and down the stairs,
up and down, to get my heart beating fast.
Then I'd run into my room, throw myself down
on the bed, and count up to 60.
I also tried running up and down the stairs
and counting to myself while I was running up
and down.
The other guys saw me running up and
down the stairs, laughed, and asked, "What are
you doing?"
I couldn't answer them-which made me
realize I couldn't talk while I was counting to
myself-and kept right on running up and down
the stairs, looking like an idiot.
(The other guys at the graduate college were
used to me looking like an idiot. On another
occasion, for example, a guy came into my
Engineering & SCience/FaIl1988 13
I found I could
arrange them in
geometrical
patterns-like a
square, for example: a pair of
socks in this
corner, a pair
in that one; a
pair over here,
and a pair over
there-eight
socks.
room-I had forgotten to lock the door during
the "experiment" - and found me in a chair
wearing my heavy sheepskin coat, leaning out
of the wide-open window in the dead of winter,
holding a pot in one hand and stirring with the
other. "Don't bother me! Don't bother me!" I
said. I was stirring Jell-O and watching it
closely; I had gotten curious as to whether Jell-O
would coagulate in the cold if you kept it moving all the time.)
Anyway, after trying every combination of
running up and down the stairs and lying on the
bed, surprise-the heart rate had no effect. And
since I got very hot running up and down the
stairs, I figured temperature had nothing to do
with it either (although I must have known that
your temperature doesn't really go up when you
exercise). I fact, I couldn't find anything that
affected my rate of counting.
Running up and down stairs got pretry boring, so I started counting while I did things I
had to do anyway. For instance, when I put out
the laundry, I had to fill out a form saying how
many shirts I had, how many pants, and so on.
I found I could write down "3" in front of
"pants" or "4" in front of "shirts: while I was
counting to myself but I couldn't count my
socks. There were too many of them: I'm
already using my "counting machine" :-36,
37, 38-and here are all these socks in front
of me-39, 40, 41. ... How do I count the
socks?
I found I could arrange them in geometrical
patterns-like a square, for example: a pair of
socks in this corner, a pair in that one; a pair
14 Engineering & Science/Fall 1988
over here, and a pair over there-eight socks.
I continued this game of counting by patterns
and found I could count the lines in a newspaper
article by grouping the lines into patterns of 3,
3, 3, and 1 to get 10; then 3 of those patterns,
3 of those patterns, 3 of those patterns, and 1 of
those patterns made 100. I went right down the
newspaper like that. After I had finished counting up to 60, I knew where I was in the patterns
and could say, "I'm up to 60, and there are 113
lines. " I found that I could even read the articles while I counted to 60, and it didn't affect
the rate! In fact, I could do anything while
counting to myself-except talk out loud, of
course.
What about typing-copying words out of
a book? I found that I could do that, too, but
here my time was affected. I was excited:
finally, I've found something that appears to
affect my counting rate! I investigated it more.
I would go along, typing the simple words
rather fast, counting to myself 19, 20; 21, typing along, until-What the hell is that word?-
Oh, yeah-and then continue counting 30, 31,
32, and so on. When I'd get to 60, I'd be late.
After some introspection and further observation, I realized what must have happened: I
would interrupt my counting when I got to a
difficult word that "needed more brains," so to
speak. My counting rate wasn't slowing down;
rather, the counting itself was being held up
temporarily from time to time. Counting to
60 had become so automatic that 1 didn't even
notice the interruptions at first.
The next morning over breakfast, I reported
-
\
Engineering & Science/Fall 1988 15
/)
16 Engineering & Science/Fall1988
Well, now it
was clear: he's
'looking' at his
tape going by so
he can't read,
and I'm 'talking' to myself
when I'm counting, so I can't
speak.
the results of all these experiments to the other
guys at the table. I told them all the things I
could do while counting to myself, and said the
only thing 1 absolutely could not do while counting to myself was talk.
One of the guys, a fella named John Tukey,
said, "I don't believe you can read, and I don't
see why you can't talk. I'll bet you I can talk
while counting to myself, and I'll bet you you
can't read:
So I gave a demonstration: they gave me
a book and I read it for a while, counting to
myself. When I reached 60 I said, "Now!"
-48 seconds, my regular time .. Then I told
them what I had read.
Tukey was amazed. After we checked him
a few times to see what his regular time was, he
started talking: "Mary had a little lamb; I can
say anything 1 want to, it doesn't make any
difference; I don't know what's bothering you"-
blah, blah, blah, and finally, "Okay!" He hit his
time right on the nose! I couldn't believe it!
We talked about it a while, and we discovered something. It turned out that Tukey
was counting in a different way: he was visualizing a tape with numbers on it going by. He
would say, "Mary had a little lamb," and he
would watch it! Well, now it was clear: he's
"looking" at his tape going by so he can't read,
and I'm "talking" to myself when I'm counting,
so 1 can't speak.
After that discovery, 1 tried to figure out
a way of reading out loud while countingsomething neither of us could do. I figured I'd
have to use a part of my brain that wouldn't
interfere with the seeing or speaking departments, so I decided to use fingers, since that
invoh;ed the sense of touch.
I soon succeeded in counting with my fingers
and reading out loud. But I wanted the whole
process to be mental, and not rely on any physical activity. So I tried to imagine the feeling of
my fingers moving while I was reading out loud.
I never succeeded. I figured that was because
I hadn't practiced enough, but it might be impossible; I've never met anybody who can do it.
By that experience Tukey and I discovered
that what goes on in different people's heads
. when they think they're doing the same thingsomething as simple as counting-is different for
different people. And we discovered that you
can externally and objectively test how the brain
works: you don't have to ask a person how he
counts and rely on his own observations of himself; instead, you observe what he can and can't
do while he counts. The test is absolute.
There's no way to beat it; no way to fake it.
It's natural to explain an idea in terms of
what you already have in your head. Concepts
are piled on top of each other; this idea is taught
in terms of that idea, and that idea is taught in
terms of another idea, which comes from counting, which can be so different for different
people!
I often think about that, especially when I'm
teaching some esoteric technique such as integrating Bessel functions. When I see equations, I
see the letters in colors-I don't know why. As
I'm talking, I see vague pictures of Bessel functions from Jahnke and Emde's book, with lighttan j's, slightly violet-bluish n's, and dark brown
x's flying around. And I wonder what the hell it
must look like to the students. 0
"Safecracker Suite,"
a tape of Feynman
recounting one of his
most infamous
exploits (interspersed
with Feynman and
Leighton on drums)
may be ordered by
writing to Box 70021,
Pasadena, California
91107. Cassette tape
is $10; CD, $15. All
proceeds go to cancer
research.
"What Do Yo~ Care What Other People Think?" will be available in bookstores at the end of October,
or it can be ordered directly from the publisher.
Please send me ___ copies of "What Do You Care What Other People Think?" at $17.95 per copy.
I enclose ____ check
___ money order for $, ______ _
(Price is postpaid. New York and California residents please add sales tax.)
Name ____________________ _
Address ____________________ _
City, State, Zip _______________ _
Please address your order to:
W. W. Norton & Company, Inc.
500 Fifth Avenue
New York, NY 10110
Dept. FM
Engineering & Science/Fall 1988 17 