---
title: Cargo Cult Science
author: Richard P. Feynman
year: 1974
source_type: speech
source_url: https://calteches.library.caltech.edu/51/2/CargoCult.pdf
---


Cargo Cult
Science
by RICHARD P. FEYNMAN
CALTECH
Some remarks on science, pseudoscience,
and learning how to not fool yourself. Caltech's 1974 commencement address.
During the Middle Ages there were all kinds of crazy ideas,
such as that a piece of rhinoceros horn would increase
potency. (Another crazy idea of the Middle Ages is these
hats we have on today-which is too loose in my case.)
Then a method was discovered for separating the ideas
which was to try one to see if it worked, and if it didn't
work, to eliminate it. This method became organized, of
course, into science. And it developed very well, so that we
are now in the scientific age. It is such a scientific age, in
fact, that we have difficulty in understanding how witch
doctors could ever have existed, when nothing that they
proposed ever really worked-or very little of it did.
But even today I meet lots of people who sooner or later get
me into a conversation about UFO's, or astrology, or some
form of mysticism, expanded consciousness, new types of
awareness, ESP, and so forth. And I've concluded that it's
not a scientific world.
Most people believe so many wonderful things that I
decided to investigate why they did. And what has been
referred to as my curiosity for investigation has landed me
in a difficulty where I found so much junk to talk about
that I can't do it in this talk. I'm overwhelmed.
First I started out by investigating various ideas of
mysticism, and mystic experiences. I went into isolation
tanks (they're dark and quiet and you float in Epsom salts)
and got many hours of hallucinations, so I know something
about that. Then I went to Esalen, which is a hotbed of this
kind of thought (it's a wonderful place; you should go visit
there). Then I became overwhelmed. I didn't realize how
much there was.
I was sitting, for example, in a hot bath and there's another
guy and a girl in the bath. He says to the girl, "I'm learning
massage and I wonder if I could practice on you?" She says
CALTECH
OK, so she gets up on a table and he starts off on her footworking on her big toe and pushing it around. Then he
turns to what is apparently his instructor, and says, "I feel a
kind of dent. Is that the pituitary?"And she says, "No,
that's not the way it feels." I say, "You're a hell of a long
way from the pituitary, man." And they both looked at
me-I had blown my cover, you see-and she said, "It's
reflexology." So I closed my eyes and appeared to be
meditating.
That's just an example of the kind of things that overwhelm
me. I also looked into extrasensory perception and PSI
phenomena, and the latest craze there was Uri Geller, a
man who is supposed to be able to bend keys by rubbing
them with his finger. So I went to his hotel room, on his
invitation, to see a demonstration of both mind reading and
bending keys. He didn't do any mind reading that
succeeded; nobody can read my mind, I guess. And my boy
held a key and Geller rubbed it, and nothing happened.
Then he told us it works better under water, and so you can
picture all of us standing in the bathroom with the water
turned on and the key under it, and him rubbing the key
with his finger. Nothing happened. So I was unable to
investigate that phenomenon.
But then I began to think,what else is there that we believe?
(And I thought then about the witch doctors, and how easy
it would have been to check on them by noticing that
nothing really worked.) So I found things that even more
people believe, such as that we have some knowledge of
how to educate. There are big schools of reading methods
and mathematics methods, and so forth, but if you notice,
you'll see the reading scores keep going down-or hardly
going up-in spite of the fact that we continually use these
same people to improve the methods. There's a witch
doctor remedy that doesn't work. It ought to be looked into;
how do they know that their method should work?
Another example is how to treat criminals. We obviously
have made no progress-lots of theory, but no progressin decreasing the amount of crime by the method that we
use to handle criminals.
Yet these things are said to be scientific. We study them.
And I think ordinary people with commonsense ideas are
intimidated by this pseudoscience. A teacher who has
some good idea of how to teach her children to read is
forced by the school system to do it some other way-or is
even fooled by the school system into thinking that her
method is not necessarily a good one. Or a parent of bad
10 JUNE 1974