---
title: The Value of Science
author: Richard P. Feynman
year: 1955
source_type: speech
topic: "the value of science to society and humanity"
source_url: "https://calteches.library.caltech.edu/1575/1/Science.pdf" 
---

the National Academy of Sciences, held on the Caltech campus November 2, 3 and 4.
DECEMBER, 1955 13
problem on a trip to Honolulu. In a Buddhist temple of nature is far, far greater than the imagination of
"The Value of Science" was given as a public address at the 1955 autumn meeting of
bad t seon
carry
use it. Such power has evident value-even though
the power may be negated by what one does.
I learned a way of exnressing this common human
We have been led to imagine all sorts of things
infinitely more marvelous than the imaginings of poets
and dreamers of the past. It shows that the imagination
the credit of science; it is also to the credit of the
moral choice which led us to good work. Scientific
knowledge is an enabling power to do either good or
u ingtruotiong on how to
things? If so, the enjoyment of science is as im
anything else. as
But I would like not to underestimate the value of
tho world wiow which is the rerult of scientific effort
to everyone. It is that scientific knowledge enables us to
do all kinds of things and to make all kinds of things.
Of course if we make good things, it is not only to
as a whole? No! But it is also a responsibility to consider the value of society itself. Is it, in the last
analysis, to arrange things so that people can enjoy
subject, this talk is dedicated to proving my pointby example.
The first way in which science is of value is familiar
by those who tell us it is our social responsibility to
reflect on the impact of science on society.
Is this mere personal enjoyment of value to society
he talks about a non-scientific matter, he will sound
as naive as anyone untrained in the matter. Since the
question of the value of science is not a scientific
learning and thinking about it, and which others
get from working in it. This is a very real and
important point and one which is not considered enough
and na usuany uon get any wh
about them.
I believe that a scientist looking at non-scientific
prohlems is iust as dumh as the next guy-and when
it is of value because it can produce something.
Another value of science is the fun called intellectual
enioyment which some people get from reading and
on them--the reason being that we know we don't have
any magic formula for solving problems, that social
problems are very much harder than scientific ones,
ud ahot ullu don't oot onuwhoro when we do think
The instructions, also, would be of no value without
the key. So it is evident that, in spite of the fact that
science could nroduce enormous horror in the world
of it.
It seems to me that we do think about these problems
from time to time, but we don't put full-time effort
which is the gate to heaven and which the gate to
hell, the key may be a dangerous object to use, but
it obviously has value. How can we enter heaven
the scientists would only look at these very difficult social
problems and not spend so much time fooling with
the less vital scientific ones, great success would come
heaven; the same key opens the gates of hell."
What then, is the value of the key to heaven? It
is true that if we lack clear instructions that determine
sible in considering the impact of science upon society.
This same suggestion must be made to many other
scientists, and it seems to be generally believed that if
that they would never forget-and I have never forgotten it. It was a proverb of the Buddhist religion:
"To every man is given the key to the gates of
F
ROM TIME TO TIME, people suggest to me that
scientists ought to give more consideration to social
nrohlems especially that they should be more responthere, the man in charge explained a little bit about
the Buddhist religion for tourists, and then ended his
talk by telling them he had something to say to them
Or allIts many values, iheeuct g
 ot fom to douht
by RICHARD P. FEYNMAN
THE VALUE OF SCIENCE
volume YIY TEERTNG AND cermper,14CC Derambe 10EE
know how to read the music. For instance, the scientific
article says, perhaps, something like this: "The radio14
question-to doubt, that's all-not to be sure. And
think it is important that we do not forget the importI
ENGINEERING AND SCIENCE
are reduced to hearing-not a song or poem, but an
evening lecture about it. This is not yet a scientific age.
Perhaps one of the reasons is that you have to
is true. Our freedom to doubt was born of a struggle
against authority in the early days of science. It
was a very deep and strong struggle. Permit us to
this remarkable thing. I don't know why. Is nobody
inspired by our present picture of the universe?. The
value of science remains unsung by singers, so you
it for granted that it is perfectly consistent to be
unsure that it is possible to live and not know.
But I don't know whether everyone realizes that this
tainly a grand adventure!
It is true that few unscientific people have this
particular type of religious experience. Our poets do
not write about it our artists do not tr to portray
room for doubt. Scientitic knowledge is a body of
statements of varying degrees of certainty-some most
unsure, some nearly sure, none absolutely certain.
Now we scientists are used to this and we take
ing, but with pleasure and confidence we turn over
each new stone to find unimagined strangeness leading
on to more wonderful questions and mysteries-cerresult is going to be, he is in some doubt. We have
found it of paramount importance that in order to
progress we must recognize the ignorance and leave
enough. With more knowledge comes deeper, more wonderful mystery, luring one on to penetrate deeper still.
Never concerned that the answer may prove disappointdoesn't know the answer to a problem, he is ignorant.
When he has a hunch as to what the result is. he is
uncertain. And when he is pretty darn sure of what the
The grand adventure
The same thrill. the same awe and mystery, come
again and again when we look at any problem deeply
The scientist has a lot of experience with ignorance
and doubt and uncertainty, and this experience is
of very great importance, I think. When a scientist
a universe of atoms an atom in the universe. explain these ideas to children.
I would now like to turn to a third value that
science has, It is a little more indirect, but not much,
standing... atoms with consciousness... matter with
curiosity.
Stands at the sea wonders at wondering
replacıng thinking), and lots of kids get the
spirit-and when they have the spirit you have a
scientist. It's too late for them to get the spirit when
thoo an in ci iniontaitina t ifict attoit
Growing in size and complexity.. living things,
masses of atoms, DNA, protein... dancing a pattern
ever more intricate.
Out of tho oradlo onto the dr land
children catch on. And when a child catches on to
an idea like that. we have a scientist. These ideas do
filter down (in spite of all the conversation about
here it ic
of one another till complex new ones are formed.
They make others like themselves... and a new dance
starts.
interested in the use of the idea, not the idea itself.
Hardly anyone can understand the importance of an
idea, it is so remarkable. Except that, possibly, some
prodigiously by the sun poured into space. A mite
makes the sea roar.
When we read about this in the newspaper, it
says, "The scientist says that this discovery may have
Deep in the sea, all molecules repeat the patterns importance in the cure of cancer." The paper is only
ye asry ponunug nebeu
For whom, for what?... on a dead planet, with no life
to entertain.
Never at rest,., tortured by energy... wasted The remarkable idea
ness... trillions apart yet forming white surt
in unison.
Ages on ages ... before any eyes could see
ofton o thundoroucly nounding the shore as now
my individuality is only a pattern or dance. The
atoms come into my brain, dance a dance, then go
year out; always new atoms but always doing the same
donoo romomhorino what tho don w uoctordo
For instance, I stand at the seashore, alone, and That is what it means when one discovers how long
start to think. There are the rushing waves... moun- it takes for the atoms of the brain to be replaced
tains of molecules, each stupidly minding its own busi- by other atoms, to note that the thing which I call
this type of thought-which no one could ever have
had in the past, because people then didn't have the
information we have about the world today.
consciousness? Last week's potatoes! That is what
now can remember what was going on in my mind a
year ago-a mind which has long ago been replaced.
I have thought about these things so many times
alone that I hope you will excuse me if I remind you of
some thoughts that I am sure you have all had-or
atoms that are in the brain are being replaced, and
the ones that were there before have gone away.
So what is this mind, what are these atoms with
a mysterious attraction, to a spinning baп
been swinging in space for billions of years, than
to be carried on the back of an elephant supported
on a tortoise swimming in a hottomless sea
OW wnat
It means that phosphorus that is in the brain of a rat
(and also in mine, and yours) is not the same phosphorus as it was two weeks agn. but that all of the
man. For instance, how much more remarkable it is
for us all to be stuck-half of us upside down-by
hall that hog
active phosphorous content of the cerebrum of the rat
decreases to one-half in a period of two weeks."
Nom inhat doog thot moon?
many answers have been given to the question of the
DECEMBER, 1955
as our duty to all coming generations.
15
meaning of life. They have realized that if some
direction or meaning could be given to our actions.
great human forces would be unleashed. So yery
great progress tnat is tie
freedom of thought, to proclaim the value of this
freedom. to teach how doubt is not to be feared but
welcomed and discussed. and to demand this freedom
only convinces one that this behavior seems to have a
kind of meaninglessness. The sciences do not directly
teach good and bad.
Throunh all a0 hauo triod to fathom tha
before.
It is our responsibility as scientists, knowing the great
progress and great value of a satisfactory philosophy
of tho that ia thof
do not seem to carry with them clear instructions on
how to use them. As an example, the great accumulation
of understanding as to how the physical world behaves
man is saved!" and thus doom man for a long time
to the chains of authority, confined to the limits of our
present imagination. It has been done so many times
fused accomplishments.
Why is this? Why can't we conquer ourselves?
Because we find that even great forces and abilities
a long time. This we will do if we say we have the
answers now, so young and ignorant; if we suppress
all discussion, all criticism, saying, "This is it, boys,
the ancients. And maybe we are doing a little better
than most of them could do. But what we ought to be
able to do seems gigantic compared with our conIt is our responsibility to leave the men of the future
a free hand. In the impetuous youth of humanity, we
can make grave errors that can stunt our growth for
are material power, communication, education, honesty
and the ideals of many dreamers.
We have more of these forces to control than did
problems. There are tens of thousands of years in the
future. Our responsibility is to do what we can, learn
what we can, improve the solutions and pass them on.
perhaps drink will become the great proplem whien Our responsibility as scientists
seems to keep man from getting all he thinks
should out of his abilities.
he
We are at the very beginning of time for the human
Clearly neace is a oreat force as is sobriety race It is not unreasonahle that we rapplo with
possibilities he seems to have. But maybe future men
will find that peace, too, can be good and bad. Perhaps peaceful men will drink out of boredom. Then
have never solved before, we must leave the door to the
unknown ajar.
:1
poisons. They are to be used in warfare tomorrow.
Nearly everybody dislikes war. Our dream today is
peace. In peace, man can develop best the enormous
of the possibilities was an opportunity, and that doubt
and discussion were essential to progress into the
unknown. If we want to solve a problem that we
problems at least. Medicine controls diseases. And
the record here seems all to the good. Yet there are
men patiently working to create great plagues and
science was already showing itself to be a successful
venture at the end of the 18th century. Even then it
was clear to socially-minded people that the openness
is communicated can be truth or lie. Communication
is a strong force also, but for either good or bad.
The applied sciences should free men of material
by which new ideas could be developed, tried out,
tossed out, more new ideas brought in; a trial and
error system. This method was a result of the fact that
or eVП
Communications between nations must promote understanding: so went another dream. But the machines
of communication can he channeled or choked. What
reason. 1is е риosopny tnat gulded the men
who made the democracy that we live under. The
idea that no one really knew how to run a government led to the idea that we should arrange a sustar
ignorant. With education universal, could all men
Voltaires? Bad can be taught at least as efficiently
good. Education is a strong force, but for either goop
be
as
But, in admitting this, we have probably found the
open channel.
This is not a new idea; this is the idea of the age
Thia in the nhil
Once some thought that the possibilities people had
were not developed because most of these people were
the ancients knew, but all of what we know today that
they didn't know, then I think that we must frankly
admit that we do not know.
good share, those of yesterday.
Education, for good and evil
What, then, is the meaning of it all? What can
we say to dispel the mystery of existence?
If we take everything into account, not only what
a dream for the future. We, of their future, see that their
dreams, in certain ways surpassed, have in many ways
remained dreams. The hopes for the future today are, in
by false belief that philosophers have realized the
apparently infinite and wondrous capacities of human
beings. The dream is to find the open channel.
potemtaues om a isagreeing poiUT 01 Alew
with their small accomplishments. Again and again the great potentialities of the race were being channeled
people have thought that we could do much better. into a false and confining blind alley. In fact, it is
They of the past saw in the nightmare of their times from the history of the enormous monstrosities created
ance of this struggle and thus perhaps lose what we
have gained. Here lies a responsibility to society.
We are all sad when we think of the wondrous
meaning of it all. But they have been of all different
sorts, and the proponents of one answer have looked
with horror at the actions of the believers in another.
HA has